# The Need for Robust Institutions

## THE NEED FOR ROBUST INSTITUTIONS

13.17 Minimising  the  magnitude  of  the  negative  effects  resulting  from  creative destruction  has  always  necessitated  a  'societal  response',  one  where  new  social infrastructure  is  created  to  foster  environments  where  innovation  drives  inclusive growth. The most notable work highlighting the importance of institutional capacity is  Daron  Acemoglu  and  James  Robinson's  book,  'Why  Nations  Fail 28 .'  Inclusive Institutions can promote broad participation in the gains from innovation and create the conditions for sustained economic growth and prosperity. They are the hands that shape a country's economic destiny.

13.18 Eric Posner reinforces the importance of building adequate institutional capacity by pointing out a grim scenario that is possible if the most optimistic AI projections are to be believed. He states, 'There is no social safety net generous enough to protect people from the mental-health effects, and society from the political turmoil, that would follow from widespread disappointment and alienation [due to substantial and permanent unemployment]. 29 ' This would be the least desirable outcome.

13.19 High-quality institutions act as mediators, ensuring that technological advancements  yield  broad-based  benefits,  while  weak  or  absent  institutions  often exacerbate disparities, resulting in uneven economic and social outcomes. For India to seriously consider the effects of AI, actions will have to focus on strong Institution Building. In this context, Andrew Haldane splits the institutional requirement along two broad categories; enabling institutions and insuring institutions.

13.20  Enabling Institutions are focused on equipping the workforce with the necessary skills needed to adapt and thrive in a shifting landscape. They impart skills and augment

28    Robinson, J. A., &amp; Acemoglu, D. (2012). Why nations fail: The origins of power, prosperity and poverty (pp. 4547). London: Profile.

29    The Future of Work in the AI Era by Eric Posner. Published in Project Syndicate. 11th April 2024, https://tinyurl. com/bde9ksce

the  content  of  education,  ensuring  that  learning  keeps  up  with  the  demands  of  the job market. Further, as new auxiliary tasks and sectors emerge from the widespread adoption  of  technology,  enabling  institutions  facilitate  the  smooth  transition  of  the workforce to these new jobs, reducing the damage to worker income and preventing loss employability. The latter is of paramount importance, because if transitions are not  carefully  managed,  workers  can  experience  a  long-lasting  unemployment,  with little prospect of catching up to market demands. As India's workforce in low-skill and low-value-added services remains vulnerable to AI, robust enabling institutions are essential to help transition workers to medium- and high-skilled jobs, where AI can augment their efforts rather than replace them.

13.21 Insuring  Institutions  are  intended  to  provide  a  soft-landing  for  workers whose  finances  have  been  hit  and  whose  well-being  has  been  affected  during  the transitionary  period.  These  institutions  help  secure  a  standard  of  living  during  the shift,  keep  inequalities  in  check  and  aid  in  keeping  the  social  fabric  cohesive.  They are also responsible for reducing the recession risk, for individuals and for societies. Insuring Institutions build safety nets (such as the National Insurance Act, 1911 and the Beveridge Report, 1942 in the UK), protect worker rights, provide finances (such as credit unions), housing (the emergence of the Young Men's Christian Association during the 19th century), and social and emotional support during periods of displacement.

13.22  In addition to the two outlined by Haldane, we propose the necessity of a third institution, Stewarding Institutions. The products of science are neither good, nor bad and what determines their net-impact on society is how they are applied. This application depends on how society comes to define the technology's utility, the ethics that govern its  applications and the rules that structure their place in society. It is important to clarify that stewarding in this case does not imply placing restrictions on innovation or dictating a narrow set of applications for technology. It implies that policymakers demonstrate a certain degree of cognisance when it comes to emerging technologies, so that when the need arises, they stand well-placed to mitigate any adverse effects that emerge as by-products of technological applications. These institutions would be agile, crosscutting across sectors and up to date on the latest developments, so that they are equipped to identify both opportunities and threats. Stewarding institutions will have to be responsible for designing an approach that delicately balances public welfare without stifling innovation. They are also required for fostering the social acceptability of AI by promoting the right levels of transparency and accountability in AI applications. For instance, AI applications in healthcare, health insurance and education would greatly benefit from higher-degrees of transparency and accountability, as these sectors are way more human-centric relative to others. Biases in models being applied to these sectors can result in adverse, unintended consequences.

13.23  Building  each  of  these  institutions  is  a  time-consuming  process  due  to  the challenges  involved  in  mobilising  the  required  intellectual  and  financial  resources. Their  need  is  not  immediately  clear  and  aligning  our  social  structures,  regulators, cooperatives, and policymaking institutions towards a distant goal is often an uphill battle. However, unlike previous technological revolutions, advancements in AI today and the utility it has the potential to deliver are being shared by all countries thanks to a globalised world. AI presently being in its infancy has made it so that every nation, irrespective of its income level is on equal footing as far as discovering its applicability goes. This level playing field provides India the time to build the necessary institutions that will minimise the disruptions and maximise societal benefits.

13.24  Another reason we postulate that India has the time available to reinforce and build  supporting  institutions  is  due  to  the  nature  of  technological  revolutions.  For technologies to be widely adopted, they have to overcome several obstacles that make them ubiquitous. Historically, technologies that have positioned themselves as General Purpose  Technologies  have  done  so  through  refinement  and  increasing  cost-effectiveness. This then created the demand for the technology, reorienting macroeconomic processes around it by changing the way we invest, what we demand, the education we impact and the quantity of labour we demand. The road to a reorientation of this size is long and we hypothesize that it could be no different for scaling AI adoption. For AI to be widely applicable in the real world, it needs to be made practical, reliable, requires the establishment of supporting infrastructure and has to achieve sufficient levels of resource efficiencies to be viable.