# Introduction

## INTRODUCTION

- 2.1 The Indian economy's financial and banking sectors have shown strong performance despite continuous geopolitical challenges. The Central Bank maintained a steady policy rate throughout the year, with the overall inflation rate under control. The effects of the monetary tightening following the Russia-Ukraine conflict are evident in the lending and deposit interest rates increase among banks. Bank loans saw significant and widespread growth across various sectors, with personal loans and services leading the way.
- 2.2 Capital  markets  have  also  shown  impressive  results,  with  India's  stock  market capitalisation  to  GDP  ratio  ranking  fifth  globally. 1 The  presence  of  a  robust  Digital  Public Infrastructure  (DPI)  and  the  greater  involvement  of  banks  and  microfinance  institutions (MFIs) have contributed to improved financial inclusion. The insurance and pension sectors are also doing well, as indicated by their expanding coverage.
- 2.3 Against this backdrop, the chapter is divided into two parts-Monetary developments and financial intermediation. The monetary developments part presents the monetary and liquidity conditions of the economy.
- 2.4 The financial intermediation part offers a discussion on the state of various financial institutions and financial market instruments that form part of the financial market milieu in India. Section I of this part presents the performance of the country's banking sector, which is the most critical pillar of the financial intermediation landscape. Section II highlights the Government's  mechanism  for  dealing  with  distressed  assets  and  how  the  Insolvency  and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC/Code) has emerged as a game-changer in resolving insolvencies. Section III discusses the Government's approach towards financial inclusion with increased emphasis on digital financial inclusion and data protection. Section IV highlights the role of MFIs in facilitating financial inclusion and promoting inclusive growth. Section V discusses the securities markets, which have come a long way to become an alternative and efficient means of resource mobilisation for the corporate sector and the Government. The global stature of India's securities markets in using technology and best practices in regulations is a matter of pride. Section VI concerns the International Financial Services Centre, Gujarat International Finance Tec-City (IFSC GIFT City) and how it is emerging as a global financial and IT service hub. Sections VII and VIII present the developments in the insurance and pension sectors. Section  IX  discusses  the  government's  mechanism  to  ensure  regulatory  coordination  and overall  financial  stability,  highlighting  the  role  of  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development Council (FSDC). Section X provides an overall conclusion and the outlook for the financial sector while mentioning the key challenges to tackle going forward.

1    As per the World Federation of Exchanges (WFE)