# Assessment and Outlook

## ASSESSMENT AND OUTLOOK

2.130 On most counts, India's financial industry has progressed over time. Domestic credit to the private sector as a per cent of GDP rose from 50.6 per cent in 2010 to 54.7 per cent in 2021. Gross and Net NPAs of SCBs have been declining over time, accompanied by an improvement in  CRAR, RoA and RoE. Despite heightened geopolitical uncertainty, India's stock markets have been stable.

2.131  Even  as  banks,  non-banks  and  corporates  battled  balance-sheet  excesses,  the  consequences of the credit boom of the first decade of the new millennium and the inevitable bust that followed in the second decade, the broad industry kept advancing the cause of financial inclusion and financial deepening. As India embarks on the vision to become a developed country by 2047, it is imperative that financial intermediation costs decline globally. India has made significant strides in this regard, which may be one reason for its resilient post-Covid economic recovery. However, much work could be done to make it a global financial leader.

2.132 The outlook for India's financial sector appears bright. The vision of Viksit Bharat by 2047 is indeed an opportunity for a prosperous society, robust financial services sector, strong public finances, and economic sovereignty. The elements of a robust financial services sector include a highly competitive and viable banking sector, universal access to banking and other financial services for all citizens, lowest intermediation costs, efficient and quick access to credit and equity funding for small businesses, highly liquid, efficient, and well-regulated stock, bond, and commodity markets. India's financial sector needs to support capital formation and promote trade, business, and investments in MSMEs, enabling them to scale It also needs to provide insurance protection and retirement security to all citizens. The share of insurance and pension fund assets in GDP stands at 19 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, in India, compared to a high of 52 per cent and 122 per cent in the USA and 112 per cent and 80 per cent in the UK, leaning scope for further improvements.

2.133 The  next  big  step  in  the  coming  years  is  likely  to  be  towards  Artificial  Intelligence/ Machine Learning (AI/ML), Decentralised Finance, Internet of Things (IoT), etc., which have a vast potential to disrupt the digital payments ecosystem. Further, the vision is for India to evolve as a 'fintech nation' with the highest number of fintech firms and the highest fintech adoption rate by incumbents fuelled by digital public infrastructure. An approach should be evolved for common user data, e.g. KYC, across Regulators. In the medium term, efforts should be made to move towards data-based lending instead of judgment-based lending, especially for small businesses. In this regard, there is a need for continuous review to identify regulatory gaps/overlaps and benchmark them with the best global practices. Financial sector firms public or privately owned - must become customer-centric. Without that, most quantitative metrics will remain elusive.

2.134 The Indian financial sector is at a turnpike moment. The dominance of banking support to credit is being reduced, and the role of capital markets is rising. For a country that aspires to be a developed nation by 2047, this is a long-awaited and welcome development. Being reliant on and exposed to the capital market, however, comes with its challenges and trade-offs. As India's  financial  sector  undergoes  this  critical  transformation,  it  must  also  brace  for  likely vulnerabilities and prepare itself with regulatory and government policy levers to intervene and hedge, as required.

********