# MONETARY MANAGEMENT AND FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION: STABILITY IS THE WATCHWORD

## MONETARY MANAGEMENT AND FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION: STABILITY IS THE WATCHWORD

<!-- image -->

India's banking and financial sectors have displayed a stellar performance in FY24. Double-digit and broad-based growth in bank credit, gross and net non-performing assets  at  multi-year  lows,  and  improvement  in  bank  asset  quality  highlight  the government's  commitment  to  a  healthy  and  stable  banking  sector.  Capital  markets are becoming prominent in India's growth story, with an expanding share in capital formation  and  investment  landscape  on  the  back  of  technology,  innovation,  and digitisation. Indian stock market was among the best-performing markets, with India's Nifty 50 index ascending by 26.8 per cent during FY24, as against (-)8.2 per cent during FY23.  The  market  capitalisation  of  the  Indian  stock  market  has  seen  a  remarkable surge, with the market capitalisation to GDP ratio being the fifth largest in the World. Supported by regulatory measures and the vision to achieve 'Insurance for all by 2047', India is poised to emerge as one of the fastest-growing insurance markets over the next five  years. The pension sector witnessed a robust increase in subscribers and assets under management.

While the outlook for India's financial sector appears bright, some areas will require focused  attention  going  forward.  The  significant  increase  in  retail  investors  in  the stock market calls for careful consideration. This is crucial because the possibility of overconfidence leading to speculation and the expectation of even greater returns, which might not align with the real market conditions, is a serious concern. For a developing economy such as India, the financial sector needs to support the banking sector and fill the gap in capital required for the economy's growth. Therefore, the financial sector should expand at a pace that is in lockstep with economic growth. In particular, India can ill-afford the economy's over financialisation at its current development stage.

The increased retail participation in financial markets and familiarity with financial products are beginning to grow in line with India's emergence as the world's fifth-largest economy. Therefore, firms operating in banking, insurance, and capital markets must keep the interests of the consumers in mind and improve their service quality through fair  selling,  disclosure,  transparency,  reliability,  and  responsiveness.  Their  internal appraisal and incentive systems must be in alignment with these considerations. It is in their interest and in the interest of the nation that they optimise their commercial goals over the long run.