# Conclusion and Way Forward

## CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD

8.83  To sum up, the employment situation in India has experienced a positive transformation over the last decade, with notable achievements  in  formalisation, skill  development, entrepreneurship,  industry  diversification,  and  inclusive  growth.  These  trends  and  the country's  commitment  to  technological  advancement  and  infrastructure  development  have positioned India as a dynamic and resilient player in the global job market. The Government is  striving  to  nurture  the  foundations  of  employment  creation  by  creating  an  ecosystem  of ease of doing business, lower logistical costs, meaningful skill development, and easy credit for entrepreneurship. This approach may take some time to bear results, but with steadfast efforts and good intentions, it will facilitate sustainable employment creation for everyone in the country.

8.84  Nevertheless, there remain long-existing challenges of formalising a burgeoning workforce, facilitating  job  creation  in  sectors  which  can  absorb  workers  shifting  from  agriculture,  and ensuring social security benefits for those in regular wage/salaried employment (as per PLFS 2022-23, 53 per cent of regular wage/salaried employees are not eligible for any social security benefit). The state governments can grease the wheels of hiring by businesses by easing the compliance burden and reforming laws on land, etc., to suit the priorities of development.

8.85  The  agro-processing  sector  lies  at  the  overlap  of  India's  requirements  of  productive, intermediate, and large-scale job creation for rural youth and women, with rich dividends to reap from the convergence of schemes and a mission-mode unwavering focus at a national scale. The Sahyadri farmer producer company is a shining example from a long list of success stories.

8.86  Concurrently, the employment landscape is fast changing worldwide, and India, aspiring to be a developed nation by 2047, must partake in the massive reshaping of jobs that AI has and is likely to further spin off. The impact of automation on workers being complex and uncertain, the direction of technological change remains susceptible to forces of political economy. India thus needs to invest in research and steer the AI bandwagon towards shared prosperity. At the same time, something as basic and age-old as unpaid care work needs our attention too. The

109 Gayathri,	K.,	Tantri,	M.L.,	Rajashekhar,	D.,	2019	'A	Critical	Review	of	Apprenticeship	Policy	in	India',	The Institute for Social and Economic Change, Bangalore, Working paper 440, ISBN 978-81-7791-296-8.

development of an affordable, reliable, and quality creche and elderly care infrastructure is the Achilles heel for female participation in paid work, which should be determined by comparative advantage and choice rather than dictated by gender.

8.87  Finally, jobs are created in the private sector. India's corporate sector has never had it so good as now, with profitability at a 15-year high in FY24. Profits had quadrupled between FY20 and  FY23.  Businesses  are  sometimes  reluctant  to  make  investments  citing  lack  of  demand visibility. This could be due to external factors and internal factors such as weak employment growth and income growth. To that extent, the lack of demand visibility is an endogenous factor. Privileging capital over labour is inimical to long-term corporate growth prospects. Businesses have an obligation to themselves to strike the right balance between deployment of capital and deployment of labour. As important, capital and labour shares of income have to be fair. In their fascination for AI and fear of erosion of competitiveness, businesses have to bear in mind their responsibility for employment generation and the consequent impact on social stability.

8.88  With respect to skilling too, it is a priority that lends itself to market-based solutions. There is a skill-seeker who benefits economically from better skills; there is a skill-provider who earns fee income for imparting it and there are employers who benefit from a skilled and productive workforce. Therefore, it is a challenge that the market can solve and to the extent that regulatory hurdles (including, for example, land availability for setting up skilling facilities) stand in the way of the market solving this problem, that is the responsibility of the Governments - union and states - to remove them.

8.89  This chapter has provided a broad estimate of the number of jobs that the economy has to generate. Of course, not all of them will seek jobs. Some of them will be self-employed and some of them will be employers too. More than jobs, economic growth is about generating livelihoods. Technological change, geopolitical churn and climate change combine to make this a  formidable challenge. Rising to it requires us - Governments at all levels and the private sector - to strive together.

********