# Implications for India's Growth Prospects

## IMPLICATIONS FOR INDIA'S GROWTH PROSPECTS

5.31   Viksit Bharat@2047 envisions India as a developed nation by 2047, the centenary of our independence. 31  This would entail sustained economic growth of close to 8 per cent every year for at least a decade. To achieve this growth, the investment rate must rise to approximately 35 per cent of GDP, up from the current 31 per cent. Additionally, it will be essential to develop the manufacturing sector further and invest in emerging technologies  such  as  AI,  robotics,  and  biotechnology.  India  will  also  need  to  create 78.5 lakh new non-farm jobs annually till 2030, 32  achieve 100 per cent literacy, develop the  quality  of  our  education  institutions,  and  develop  high-quality,  future-ready infrastructure at scale and speed.

5.32  India has carried out a series of structural reforms in the last decade. From the Goods and Services Tax (GST), which has been verily described as India's EU moment, to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), which established a framework for dealing with corporate renewal, to the RERA (Real Estate Regulation Act), which helped clean up the real estate sector and rapid roll-out of digital infrastructure - the India Stack (UID, UPI, DBT). The introduction of GST in July 2017 marked a significant shift in India's indirect tax structure, aiming to create a unified, streamlined taxation system across the country.

5.33   The  implementation of GST generated a host of positive externalities through enhancement  in  ease  of  doing  business,  giving  impetus  to  digitalisation,  fostering economic integration via the creation of a single market, and adding to the buoyancy of  revenue  generation  and  collection.  Similarly,  IBC  has  led  to  faster  resolution  of non-performing  assets  (NPAs)  in  banks  and  created  a  more  efficient  bankruptcy process, boosting investor confidence and India's Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) has emerged as a game-changer in the country's journey towards a more inclusive and efficient economy. By leveraging digital tools and platforms, DPI has not only enhanced the  accessibility  of  services  but  also  brought  transformative  benefits  across  various sectors.

30    IMF  Blog,  2023,  'Geoeconomic  fragmentation  threatens  food  security  and  clean  energy  transition',  https:// tinyurl.com/57s7z7rt.

31 PIB Press release by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports dated 21 November 2024, https://tinyurl.com/ mrxf5bc5.

32  PIB Press release by the Ministry of Finance dated 22 July 2024, https://tinyurl.com/46nx4fr9.

5.34  Besides the above, India recognises the critical role of micro, small, and medium enterprises  (MSMEs)  in  driving  economic  growth,  employment  generation,  and innovation. The government has implemented several policies and initiatives over the last decade to support and promote the growth of MSMEs. These efforts focused on improving access to finance, enhancing technological capabilities, providing market linkages,  and  addressing  structural  challenges  MSMEs  face.  However,  while  these initiatives  have  made  significant  strides  in  promoting  MSMEs,  some  challenges in  the  regulatory  environment  remain.  Regulatory  compliance  burden  holds  back formalisation and labour productivity, limits employment growth, chokes innovation and depresses growth.

5.35  There is an observed tendency for firms in India to remain small. By staying small, firms lose access to institutional capital, skilled talent, and technology infusion and often function outside formal supply chains. This creates a parallel informal economy and contributes to low labour productivity. The logic for staying small often is to remain under the  regulatory  radar  and  steer  clear  of  the  rules  and  labour  and  safety  laws. Ironically, the biggest casualties are employment generation and labour welfare, which most regulations were originally designed to encourage and protect, respectively.

5.36  Much has been done in this space through policy action to incentivise firms to grow.  Part  of  the  solution  lies  in  digitisation,  decriminalisation  and  divestment  of functions.  Measures  such  as  the  PAN  2.0  project  focusing  on  paperless  processes while  establishing  PAN  as  a  common  identifier  for  all  digital  systems  of  specified government agencies are steps in the right direction. 33  Similarly, the Jan Vishwas Act 2023 decriminalised 183 provisions in 42 central Acts administered by 19 ministries/ departments. 34   The  Joint  Parliamentary  Committee  reviewed  the  Jan  Vishwas  Bill and subsequently recommended extending the exercise to further Acts, ensuring the continuous modernisation of India's regulatory framework - Jan Vishwas 2.0. 35  Thus, it is true that much has been done, and it is also true that much remains to be done for at least two reasons. One is our size; two, as the economy grows, hitherto unseen and non-binding constraints emerge and become binding. Hence, there is a constant need to evolve.

5.37  Chapter 5 of the Economic Survey of FY24 identified various structural reforms and strategies across sectors to focus on from a medium-term perspective. These included suggestions regarding creating an enabling policy and regulatory environment for the upgradation  of  capacity  and  know-how  of  component  manufacturers,  increasing  the availability of trained human resources, addressing resource bottlenecks and regulatory impediments to accelerate India's gross fixed capital formation, strategy for growth and

33  PIB Press release by the Ministry of Finance dated 26 November 2024, https://tinyurl.com/yz7y7jba.

34  PIB  Press  release  by  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and  Industry  dated  02  August  2023,  https://tinyurl.com/ ukhabyzz.

35    PIB Press release by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry dated 28 September August 2024, https://tinyurl. com/mpnbvp6m.

expansion of India's Mittelstand and helping it to expand via deregulation and policy actions  at  the  level  of  states  and  local  governments;  undertaking  reforms  that  help remove  the  growth  impediments  in  the  agriculture  sector;  a  strategy  to  leverage  the rapidly growing pool of global green capital from sovereign wealth funds, global pensions, private equity, and infrastructure funds for securing green transition finance; working towards bridging the education-employment gap and enabling the New Education Policy to realise its objective and potential; and building state capacity and capability.

5.38   To  succeed  with  these  structural  reforms,  a  fundamental  pre-requisite  is  to accelerate and amplify the deregulation agenda already underway in the last ten years and work towards giving people back their agency and enhancing the economic freedoms of individuals and organisations. The Preface again has underscored the importance of this eloquently.

5.39  Amidst this new and emerging global reality, the best way to succeed with these structural  reforms is  to  start  relying  on  the  internal  engines  and  domestic  levers  of growth,  focusing  on  a  central  element  -  the  economic  freedom  of  individuals  and organisations  to  pursue  legitimate  economic  activity.  Unburdened  by  licensing, inspection and compliance requirements, the people and small enterprises of India, with their high aspirations and intrinsic inventiveness, will find answers to the pressing challenges of growth, employment and development. Accelerating and amplifying the deregulation agenda already underway in the last ten years is the need of the hour. Also, every state in the country can learn from the best practices of other states in different areas so that all progress in unison. The next section shows the way forward.

## REINVIGORATING THE INTERNAL ENGINES OF GROWTH - ENHANCING ECONOMIC FREEDOM THROUGH DEREGULATION

5.40  As outlined in the sections above, the global economy is now transitioning to a phase where the traditional, fundamental policy levers that were once effective may no longer be applicable or even relevant. Across the world, the focus of policymaking globally has shifted inwards. The promise of shared benefits from a globalised world with open trade, free flow of capital and technology, and sanctity for rules of the game may be behind us. It is as unwelcome and unfortunate as it is real.

5.41  To be clear, we do not suggest India closes itself to the world. On the contrary, the current tendencies in the rest of the world necessitate that India redoubles its efforts to boost exports and attract investment. One way to do this is to benchmark ourselves to  the  rest  of  the  world  rather  than  our  past.  However,  given  the  uncertain  global environment and fraught geopolitics, expectations of the external sector's contribution to our economic growth must be realistic. Therefore, we need to intensify our efforts on the domestic front.

5.42  To achieve a sustained rise in living standards, the Indian economy will need to grow by around 8 per cent in real terms every year for at least a decade. Achieving this growth will require an increase in the investment rate to around 35 per cent of GDP from the current level of around 31 per cent. It is deemed desirable, in general, for the investment rate to rise so that a higher GDP growth rate is achieved. That has been the experience of East Asian economies, starting with Japan post-WWII and ending with China in the last four decades.

5.43   The  context  has  changed  dramatically,  as  elaborated  in  the  previous  sections. Therefore, as discussed in Chapter 3, the amount of investment that can be supported by external savings supplementing domestic savings must be reassessed. It means that raising  the  efficiency  of  investment  matters  more  for  economic  growth  than  raising the investment rate. The investment efficiency rate is improved by reducing the time taken for investment to generate output and by generating more output per unit of investment.

5.44   Unleashing  the  potential  of  domestic-led  growth  in  India  via  enhancement  of investment and economic efficiency will entail a combination of efforts, viz., assessing the actual/true cost of regulation, undertaking systematic deregulation to reduce/remove the  same  by  liberalising  standards  and  controls  and  designing  policy  prescriptions that reduce the cost and burden of undertaking an economic activity, for citizens and businesses alike. India must pursue economic growth by undertaking policy actions that enhance economic freedom, i.e. citizens' unhindered ability to pursue legitimate economic and entrepreneurial aspirations.

## Deregulation and economic freedom: A catalyst for growth

5.45 Deregulation is more  critical for MSME  growth  than  large  enterprises. Compliance costs in terms of time and financial resources are non-trivial for MSMEs. Large enterprises usually find a way around compliance. Management and financial bandwidth are limited for smaller enterprises. Therefore, deregulation is a policy agenda for small businesses. Over the past decade, India's policy focus has demonstrated an awareness of this approach, recognising the importance and urgency of deregulation while establishing a framework for comprehensive process and governance reforms. The first phase of these reforms focused on reducing the compliance burden, streamlining and digitising systems, processes and information and providing incentives for specific sectors. The union government has undertaken deregulation by implementing process and governance reforms, simplifying taxation laws, rationalising labour regulations, and  decriminalising  business  laws.  For  example,  the  union  government  brought  to Parliament reforms to our forest regulations that stood in the way of enterprises doing something as simple as building a passageway from their property to the main road. 36

5.46   On their part, states have also participated in deregulation by reducing compliance burdens and simplifying and digitising processes. States have tried to reduce the cost of regulations by engaging with businesses to identify pain points. For example, Haryana and Tamil Nadu amended their building regulations 12 times in the past decade to make  it  easier  to  build. 37 Similarly,  Punjab  conducted  grievance  redressal  sessions with industries and liberalised several building, labour, and fire regulations. 38  In the same  vein,  Andhra  Pradesh,  Karnataka  and  Haryana  have  relaxed  the  prohibitions on  employing  women  in  night  shifts  for  Information-Technology-Enabled-Services (ITES) industries by instituting conditional exemptions, and Uttar Pradesh has relaxed building regulations for hotels. 39

5.47       The  assessment  of  states  as  per  the  Business  Reform  Action  Plan  (BRAP)  formulated by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade confirms the above hypothesis and shows that deregulation helps spur industrialisation. Chart VII.21 in the Industry Chapter of this Economic Survey shows a positive correlation between the ease of doing business in states and the level of industrial activity, suggesting the need for deregulation and enterprise-friendly reforms in aspiring and emerging states. These  findings  are  aligned  with  international  experiences  that  countries  have  had while undertaking deregulation, such as an increase in consumer welfare, facilitating competition  and  innovation  in  industry  and  an  overall  positive  effect  on  economic growth (Winston, 1993). 40

5.48  Such efforts have laid the foundation for states to embark on the next round of reforms now, the need for which is urgent and the scope for which is immense. Many states have set targets of becoming billion to trillion-dollar economies over the next two decades. However, current regulations act as binding constraints on growth by increasing  the  cost  of  market  entry,  force-fitting  inefficient  models  for  operations, and prolonging industrial sickness. Regulations hurt businesses' ability to start and grow over time. For example, factory regulations make it cheaper for a business to run two 150-worker factories than one 300-worker factory, 41  discouraging economies of scale. Regulations also hurt workers by discouraging job creation, limiting wages, and encouraging informal employment. For example, Indian workers cannot formally work overtime because the law requires employers to pay at least twice the regular wage.

37    Anand, B.; Roy, S. &amp; and Kaur, S. (2024, April 17). 'Trends in amendments to building regulations. https:// prosperiti. substack.com/p/24-trends-in-amendments-to-building.

38    Business today, 2023, 'Sarkar Sanatkar Milni: Industrialists appreciate Punjab CM's initiative in Jalandhar', https://tinyurl.com/3h4m9uc5.

39    Conditions for women's employment at night in Haryana: https://tinyurl.com/msemuxke. Conditions to employ women at night in Karnataka: https://tinyurl.com/yc3fmrur. Uttar Pradesh amends building regulations for hotels: https://tinyurl.com/uus6bjm4 .

40    Winston,  C.  (1993).  Economic  Deregulation:  Days  of  Reckoning  for  Microeconomists.  Journal  of  Economic Literature, 31(3), 1263-1289. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2728241.

41  Chapter V, Factories Act, 1948 (No. 63 of 1948).

Indian workers accept informal employment to receive overtime pay.

5.49  Regulations increase the cost of all operational decisions in firms. For example, factory  owners  must  dedicate  time  and  resources  to  obtain  the  Change  of  Land Use  license  and  ensure  compliance  with  zoning  regulations.  Factory  owners  must also  invest  in  transportation,  additional  land,  construction  of  rooms  for  rest  and canteens, and paperwork to employ women on night shifts. Current regulations also discourage innovation and creative destruction. Similarly, Indians cannot undertake apprenticeships  while  undergoing  formal  education  due  to  working  hour  limits  on apprentices.

5.50   In many cases, current regulations are gold-plated, i.e. they are set with an inflated assumption of  regulatory  capacity  and  the  capacity  of  regulated  entities  to  comply. There is  some  scope  for  making  many  of  the  current  regulations  less  restrictive,  in line with comparable standards recommended by international bodies and adopted by other countries.

5.51    Given  their  economic  capacity,  Indian  firms  cannot  adhere  to  applicable regulations without jeopardising growth opportunities and hurting investments and job creation. For instance, if there is a surge in orders during specific months in the year, exporting firms should have the flexibility to deploy more labour hours and lower them during lean seasons. This flexibility is needed. Indian regulations force employers to redirect resources away from potential growth and employment opportunities to meet compliance requirements. For example, an Indian factory owner with a 5,000-squaremetre plot can be required to forgo up to 69 per cent of their plot to comply with building standards. This tract of lost land can cost up to ₹ 1.58 crore and could have been used to create up to 509 additional jobs. 42

5.52  In sum, the faster economic growth that India needs is only possible if the union and state governments continue to implement reforms that allow small and medium enterprises  to  operate  efficiently  and  compete  cost-effectively.  Regulations  must  be rationalised  to  ensure  that  the  regulation  is  the  minimum  necessary  to  achieve  its objectives and the maximum feasible given the limited managerial and other resources at the disposal of small and medium enterprises. The focus of reforms and economic policy must now be on systematic deregulation.

42    https://prosperiti.org.in/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/State-of-Regulation-Report\_Building-Standards\_ December-2023.pdf.

5.53   States  can  undertake  systematic  deregulation  by  systematically  reviewing regulations for their cost-effectiveness by following a three-step process:

Identifying areas for deregulation: Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) 2.0 should be a state government-led initiative focused on fixing the root causes behind the unease of doing business. States are rule-making bodies and not just implementing agencies.  States  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  regulate  List  II  subjects  like  land, buildings, water, and local trade and commerce. States can regulate concurrently with  the  union  government  on  List  III  subjects  like  labour  welfare,  electricity, and mechanical vehicles. 43  States can systematically deregulate laws on all these subjects  by  amending  the  primary  law.  Where  the  union  government  sets  the primary law, states also have the option to deregulate by amending subordinate regulations. States should consider these options while identifying opportunities for deregulation. States may consider the following areas of regulations as a starting point to identify reform opportunities:

Table V.1: List of areas of regulation and provisions affecting businesses

| Area                      | Examples of regulations                                                     |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Legal Status and admin    | Municipal laws, citizen charters, accountability in public service delivery |
| Land                      | Land revenue, land reform, town and country planning, land ceiling          |
| Building and Construction | Town and country planning, building bye-laws, fire safety laws              |
| Labour                    | Rules under Union Codes, factories, contract labour, shops laws             |
| Utilities                 | Water, electricity, building bye-laws, municipal laws                       |
| Transport                 | Motorvehicleslaws,motortransportworkerslaws,carriage of goods               |
| Logistics                 | Warehousing and logistics policies, building bye-laws                       |
| Buying and Selling        | Agricultural Produce and Livestock Market Committee laws                    |
| Environment               | Laws for prevention and control of pollution of water, air                  |
| Sector Specific           | Excise, food safety, legal metrology                                        |

In each of these areas of regulation, the state issues mandates, including permits, standards, price and quantity controls, fees and taxes, compliances, inspections, and penalties. Each substantive mandate increases the cost, time, and uncertainty of starting and operating a business, discouraging intensive economic activity and

43  Seventh Schedule, Constitution of India, 1950.

the growth of enterprises. Liberalising standards and controls, revising licensing norms,  modifying  regulatory  thresholds,  blunting  barriers  to  enterprise  growth, and instituting procedural safeguards are some examples of reform actions needed. Thereafter, states must implement line-by-line corrections to regulations to allow greater freedom in decision-making.

## Thoughtfully comparing the regulations with other states and countries:

States should learn from inter-state and inter-country comparisons of regulations to identify opportunities for growth-inducing reforms. States can learn from each other's  recent  deregulation  experiences  and  creative  solutions  deployed  towards common problems. Learning from the example of other states that have deregulated could  save  discovery  time.  For  example,  until  the  early  noughties,  all  states prohibited women from working night shifts. Over the years, states like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Haryana began deregulating women's opportunities by moving to a permissions-based system and then to a conditions-based system. 44 Some states have completely deregulated women's participation in the IT industry. Such initiatives and experiences hold important lessons for all states.

Moreover,  international  experiences  with  regulation  also  hold  some  important lessons. On many issues, other countries (and states within other countries) have moved from a more controlling position to a more deregulated context. In the Asian neighbourhood alone, there are many context-appropriate examples of deploying less onerous regulations without jeopardising citizen welfare. For example, Japan allows  mixed-used  development  in  densely  populated  urban  areas,  and  Korea allows weekly working hour limits to be averaged over 6 months. 45  Farther afield, there  may  be  even  more  useful  lessons.  For  example,  some  parts  of  the  United States  have  adopted  an  "as-of-right  development"  stance,  reducing  the  number of  pre-construction  approval steps. 46 The  rise  of  competitive  federalism  in  India allows states to apply such international experiences in simplifying and reducing regulatory burdens to draw investments. However, some caution must be exercised in emulating what may be seen as best practices. Instead of only looking for 'best practices', states should identify the 'minimum necessary, maximum feasible' option for regulation.

44    Karnataka: Karnataka Shops and Commercial Establishments (Amendment) Act, 2002 (No. 14 of 2002) Haryana: Notification No. 6/35/2002-1Lab. Andhra Pradesh: G.O.Ms.No.16, LET&amp;F (Lab.II) Deptt., dt:30.05.2002.

45  Japan: City Planning Act, Act No. 100. South Korea: Labour Standards Act, Act No. 11270.

46  United States: Massachusetts General Laws c. 40A.

## Estimating the cost of each of these regulations on individual enterprises:

Every  regulation  imposes  monetary,  opportunity,  and  state  capacity  costs.  Most regulations require businesses to spend some money to ensure and demonstrate compliance.  This  monetary  cost  is  often  coupled  with  foregone  entrepreneurial opportunities. In addition, every mandate requires the ability to check and enforce compliance. States must systematically account for the unit-level impact of every regulation before they are passed. For example, Indian states require factories with a 10,000 square metre plot to forgo between 1,164 to 3,522 square metres of land for setbacks. As a result, setback regulations cost Indian factories the productive value of land valued up to ₹97.5 lakh and the opportunity to create up to 521 jobs. 47 This is not to argue that setbacks are to be done away with but to make the case that regulation must reckon with the deadweight loss and the opportunity cost of every such imposition.

States  must  also  anticipate  the  unintended  consequences  of  regulations.  States often  set  regulations  to  achieve  some  welfare  objective  without  recognising  how the regulations may affect businesses in the long term. For example, many states classify strips of land beside public roads as 'protected forests'. States classified these 'strip forests' in the first two decades after independence to increase protections for tree cover in populated areas. Over the years, this simple classification has resulted in businesses spending over 250 days obtaining approval for simple passageway access.  These  costs  are  disproportionate  to  the  benefit  of  protecting  tree  cover in  populated areas and were entirely unintended. Such standards set unrealistic expectations given the binding constraint under which the Indian State operates the still-evolving state capacity. Often, these standards mimic those set in high-state capacity nations without commensurate functionalities. For example, today, only 644 working inspectors are available to oversee compliance in 3,21,578 factories, 48 with each overseeing around 500 factories. Under low-state capacity administrative systems,  unrealistic  expectations  can  lead  to  "premature  load-bearing". 49 In  the future, States may consider the following list of approaches [See Table 2] as a guide to designing reform options for each regulation:

47  Anand, B.; Roy, S.; Kaur, S. (2024). 'State of Regulation: Building standards reforms for jobs and growth'.

48    Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes (DGFASLI) (2022). 'Standard Reference Note'.

49    Andrews, Matt; Pritchett, Lant; Woolcock, Michael. (2017, January). 'Premature load bearing: Doing too much too soon'. Building State Capability: Evidence, Analysis, Action (Oxford, 2017; online edn, Oxford Academic, 16 Feb. 2017), https://tinyurl.com/53we9579.

Table V.2: List of potential approaches for reforming laws affecting businesses

| Approach to reform                            | Description                                                                                                                                                                | Status                                 |
|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Reduce compliance burden                      | Reduce administrative costs incurred by businesses to demonstrate adherence to laws.                                                                                       | Already pursued in Phase 1 of EoDB     |
| Streamline systems, processes and information | Modify processes for business- government interactions to remove redundancies, simplify process flow, and increase transparency and accountability of government services. | Already pursued in Phase 1 of EoDB     |
| Digitise systems, processes and information   | Establish digital means of interacting with businesses to improve efficiency.                                                                                              | Already pursued in Phase 1 of EoDB     |
| Provide incentives                            | Extend special benefits to key sectors or clusters of businesses.                                                                                                          | Already pursued in Phase 1 of EoDB     |
| Liberalise standards and controls             | Minimise controls that distort markets, adopt a 'minimum necessary, maximum feasible' approachtosettingregulations                                                         | This may be pursued in Phase 2 of EoDB |
| Set legal safeguards for enforcement          | Ensure adherence to due process norms to encourage a facts-based resolution of disputes                                                                                    | This may be pursued in Phase 2 of EoDB |
| Reduce tariffs and fees                       | Minimise or remove mandated charges inflating utility costs                                                                                                                | This may be pursued in Phase 2 of EoDB |
| Use risk-based regulation                     | Tailor legal norms to the risk profile of businesses, involve third parties in enforcement                                                                                 | This may be pursued in Phase 2 of EoDB |

5.54  States have undertaken four of these eight approaches in the first phase of EoDB reforms.  In  the  next  phase,  they  must  break  new  ground  on  liberalising  standards and controls, setting legal safeguards for enforcement, reducing tariffs and fees, and applying risk-based regulation.

-  Liberalising standards and controls: States can reduce the cost of compliance by  liberalising  standards  and  controls  on  Indian  businesses.  Indian  regulations require firms to invest time and money and forgo growth opportunities to ensure compliance. These regulations must be examined to ensure they impose the lowest

cost necessary to achieve their social objectives. Specific examples in this regard have been outlined in Box V.2.

-  Setting legal safeguards for penalties and enforcement: States can enforce many regulations through punitive actions like civil penalties and cancellation of licences. These punitive actions can limit businesses' ability to operate within legal limits. States can improve the investment climate by increasing the accuracy and transparency of such punitive action. See specific examples in Box V.2.
-  Reducing tariffs and fees: States impose direct costs on the operation and growth of Indian businesses by imposing tariffs and taxes. While these regulations support public spending, these regulations can also reduce the competitiveness of Indian businesses. States can encourage sustained growth by rationalising tariffs and fees in line with standards from other jurisdictions, sub-national or international. See specific examples in Box V.2.
-  Applying risk-based regulation: States impose similar regulations on businesses that pose differing risks of some socially undesirable consequence, viz. fire, pollution and building collapse. This often results in low- and medium-risk businesses bearing an  inordinately  high  cost  of  compliance.  Under  such  general  regulations,  state departments also struggle to scrutinise riskier businesses adequately. By adopting risk-based regulation, state departments can optimise public resources to generate social  benefits  like  fire  safety  and  environmental  protection.  Under  risk-based regulations, low- and medium-risk businesses would also face lower compliance costs without substantial public safety and health reductions.

## Box V.2: Making a case for EoDB 2.0

## A.  Liberalising standards and controls

Removing prohibitions on women from working in factory processes: Indian states prohibit women from many factory processes. India's ten most populous states collectively  impose 139 prohibitions on women from participating in specific factory processes. Governments impose these prohibitions given the dangerous nature of the processes. However, inter-state comparison and scientific literature indicate that these prohibitions are enforced without evidence of special health risks to women workers. For example, some states allow women to participate in abrasive blasting (used to clean metal  surfaces),  but  others  prohibit  women  from  participating  in  the  same  process. Similarly, women are prohibited from participating in any process to manufacture lead or its compounds. However, scientific literature indicates that lead is not likely to pose special  health  risks  to  women.  These  prohibitions  exclude  women  from  high-paying jobs, making the prohibitions counterproductive.

Rationalise parking norms to reduce land loss in industrial and commercial plots: Commercial buildings in many Indian states must build more floors to get the same floor space as some frontier states and countries. This makes Indian commercial

buildings artificially slender, wastes valuable commercial land, and increases the cost of construction. This happens due to restrictive setbacks and ground coverage regulations that  force  commercial  buildings  to  have  a  higher  slenderness  ratio  than  in  other countries. Therefore, an entrepreneur must build more floors to have the same built-up area if the ground floor were available, incurring a higher construction cost. Many state governments have designated 'tourism and hospitality' and 'information technology' as thrust sectors. States should increase the productivity of commercial land used by hotels and offices to provide impetus to these industries.

## B.  Setting legal safeguards for penalties and enforcement

Adding safeguards to reduce chances of arbitrary administrative action: States enforce compliances without being bound by standards that ensure proper use of punitive powers. As per administrative law norms, states should only impose punitive measures after ensuring that the accused person is:

1. Issued a show-cause notice with adequate facts about the alleged violation,
2.  Allowed an opportunity to represent their side of the argument,
3.    Issued a reasoned order detailing the reasons for the final decision by states and
4.  Allowed appeals against decisions.

However,  Indian  regulations  do  not  require  states  to  adhere  to  these  procedural safeguards while pursuing punitive action. For example, many states do not require departments to issue detailed show-cause notices, allow representations by the accused person, or issue reasoned decisions before sealing or demolishing buildings. Without these safeguards, states are more likely to make inaccurate or bad-faith decisions about the use of buildings in Indian cities. Guaranteeing procedural safeguards by law can reduce the legal risk of investments and job creation, encouraging rapid growth.

## C. Reducing tariffs and fees

Reducing electricity tariff markup for industrial users: States impose a high markup on the sale of electricity to industries. This high markup discourages industries from formally operating and growing over time. Across states, industrial users can pay a 10-25% markup over the cost of electricity supply. Other countries impose lower rates for electricity use. For example, Vietnam sets the electricity sale price at a 10% lower rate than the cost of generating electricity. Such differences in energy costs reduce the global competitiveness of Indian factories, discouraging growth.

## D.  Applying risk-based regulation:

Increasing the role of private parties in building approvals and inspections: Indian states give private parties limited opportunities to participate in enforcement processes for building safety. This limits the ability of Indian states to enforce regulations and encourage compliance. Indian states only allow private parties to participate in the approval of the initial building plan. However, all subsequent approvals and inspections are conducted by government officers. Given the paucity of officers, state departments cannot enforce building regulations in growing cities without augmenting state capacity with private parties.

Other countries have had positive experiences involving third parties in enforcement processes for building safety. For example, Australia and Canada adopted the 'PublicPrivate Partnership' (PPP) model to enforce building safety regulations. Close to seventy per cent of applicants chose to obtain licences from private parties due to their speed of service, availability and specialisation. The PPP model also engendered competition between public and private agencies, encouraging greater enforcement and improved safety outcomes.

Increasing the validity of fire NOC for low- and moderate-risk buildings: States  set  a  low  validity  period  for  fire  NOCs.  The  low  validity  periods  discourage applicants from obtaining NOCs. In most states, industries are only issued a Fire NOC for one to three years. Industrial owners must repeatedly submit similar information to renew NOCs. In many states, applicants are required to answer many questions about the building and plot's structure and the instalments to obtain a Fire NOC every two years. Even if applicants apply for NOCs, some state departments do not have sufficient administrative strength to decide on all applications. By raising the validity period, state departments can reduce their administrative burden and reduce compliance costs for applicants without jeopardising fire safety.

## Renewed paradigm for medium-term growth

5.55   Complementing  the  efforts  of  the  Centre,  States  must  pursue  systematic deregulation as a policy priority so that economic freedom of factors of production is augmented. Factor market regulations, i.e. laws that affect the use of land, labour and building, are the right place to begin since these regulations affect decision-making in all  enterprises.  States  can  begin  the  deregulation  exercise  by  identifying  regulations that affect decision-making in enterprises. Next, states can compare their regulations on  these  issues  with  those  in  other  states  and  countries.  Finally,  after  identifying alternatives, states must examine the economic impact of their current regulation on a single sample enterprise. States need not undertake a complex analysis of all economic effects. Instead, states may undertake a data-informed exercise of mapping how much resources, time, and risk a single enterprise must devote to compliance.

5.56 The  call  for  enhancing  economic  freedom  through  deregulation  has  renewed momentum  in  today's  rapidly  evolving  global  economy.  Over-regulation  stifles innovation and economic dynamism. In many instances, regulations, while intended to protect consumers, workers, and the environment, can unintentionally create barriers to entry, reduce competition, and slow the pace of innovation. By reducing excessive regulatory burdens, governments can help businesses become more efficient, reduce costs, and unlock new growth opportunities. Strategic and systematic deregulation can catalyse growth, innovation, and competitiveness.

5.57  Systematic deregulation is as critical, if not more, as investments in infrastructure and  incentives  to  encourage  innovation  and  create  a  viable  Mittelstand,  i.e.  India's SME sector. The focus on Mittelstand has played a pivotal role in the economic success of  countries  like  Germany,  Switzerland,  Japan,  and  Singapore.  These  nations  have leveraged  the  strength  of  their  Mittelstand  to  drive  innovation,  foster  high-quality manufacturing,  and  create  a  robust  export  economy.  With  deregulation,  India's Mittelstand can help the states weather economic shocks, enable India to realise its manufacturing  aspirations,  attract  long-term  investments,  and  encourage  growth. Such growth would be sustainable and 'employment-sensitive', i.e., enhancing workers' long-term welfare.

5.58   Even  as  large  companies  invariably  tend  to  prioritise  capital-intensive  growth over labour-intensive growth, small and medium enterprises are likely to have a better balance between the two, encouraging employment generation. That is a compelling reason to ensure that the state does not hinder their growth. States have an opportunity to undertake regulatory reforms that fundamentally change the nature of interaction between  governments  and  small  and  medium  businesses.  States  can  encourage a  facilitative  and  collaborative  relationship  by  adopting  regulations  sensitive  to businesses' economic capacity and minimising opportunity costs.

5.59   Countries  worldwide  have  instituted  programs  for  a  sustained  focus  on deregulation. For example, the United States has created the Office of Management and Budget. This office examines all proposed legislation in the Federal Government based on cost-effectiveness. The incoming administration in the US has set a great store of deregulation by setting up a new Department of Government Efficiency. In an op-ed in the Economist, the Argentinian President argued for economic prudence and reduced regulatory  burdens 50 .  Similarly,  the  United  Kingdom  Parliament  has  adopted  the Better Regulation Framework. As part of this framework, the Parliament enacts all new legislation in adherence to the 'one-in, two-out' principle', requiring every pound of new regulatory burden on businesses to be offset by identifying and removing two pounds of existing burdens from other areas of the regulation 51 . New Zealand has established a  Ministry  of  Regulation  to  examine  laws  and  propose  repeals  and  amendments  to improve compliance experience. Indian states must examine these global experiences and carry key lessons relevant to their contexts.

5.60   The  need  to  find  growth  avenues  in  an  export-challenged,  environmentchallenged, energy-challenged, and emissions-challenged world means we need to act on deregulation with a greater sense of urgency. The focus on domestic growth levers is not an option but a compulsion. Without deregulation, other policy initiatives will not

50    XX Milei, Javier (2024, November 20). 'Argentina: the making of an economic miracle?' https://tinyurl.com/ yeybxa85.

51  Department for Business Innovation and Skills (2014). 'The Ninth Statement on New Regulation'.

deliver on their desired goals. The right balance of regulation and freedom can unleash the  creative  and  productive  capacities  of  India's  small  and  medium  entrepreneurs, leading  to  innovation,  greater  competition,  and  overall  prosperity.  By  empowering small  businesses,  enhancing  economic  freedom,  and  ensuring  a  level  playing  field, governments can help create an environment where growth and innovation are not only possible but inevitable. India's growth aspirations require nothing less.

5.61  The areas suggested for deregulation in this chapter are merely illustrative. But, there are multiple benefits and likely unintended beneficial consequences once they are set in motion. Concerted actions by states towards deregulation will lift sentiment, enhance faith and trust in governance, and even improve compliance as the relationship between the governing and the governed turns into a partnership. Second, once some regulations are repealed or simplified, the remaining ones become progressively easier. It is like peeling an onion. Once one layer is removed, the other layers come into view and become easier to peel off. Third, it may set off a 'butterfly effect', referred to in a different context earlier in this chapter. The butterfly effect means that small actions can  have  large  consequences.  Small  acts  of  deregulation  may  set  off  big  waves  of entrepreneurship, investment, innovation and growth.

******