# Chemical-free India: Organic and Natural Farming

chemical-free India: organic and natural Farming

8.9 Organic and natural farming provides chemical fertiliser and pesticide-free food grains and other crops, improves soil health and reduces environmental pollution. India has 44.3 lakh organic farmers, the highest in the world, and about 59.1 lakh ha area was brought under organic farming by 2021-22. Sikkim voluntarily adopted going organic, and the process of getting the total cultivable land of 58,168 hectares under organic farming commenced at ground level in

2010. It became the first State in the world to become fully organic, and other States, including Tripura and Uttarakhand, have set similar targets.

8. 10 The Government has been promoting organic farming by implementing two dedicated schemes, i.e., Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) since 2015 through cluster/ Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) formation. PKVY Scheme is being implemented in a cluster mode (with min. 20 ha size). Financial assistance of ₹50,000 per ha for three years is provided to the farmer, out of which ₹31,000 is given as incentives for organic inputs provided directly through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). Under PKVY as of 16 November 2022, 32,384 clusters totalling  6.4  lakh  ha  area  and  16.1  lakh  farmers  have  been  covered.  In  addition,  as  part  of the Namami Gange Programme, a 1.2 lakh ha area has been covered under organic farming. MOVCDNER is dedicated to  promoting  organic  farming  of  niche  crops  of  the  North  East Region through FPOs. Under the MOVCDNER, 177 FPOs/FPCs have been created, covering 1.5 lakh farmers and 1.7 lakh hectares.

8. 11 Promotion of natural farming began in 2019-20, when Bhartiya Prakratik Krishi Paddhati (BPKP),  a  sub-scheme  of  PKVY,  was  launched  to  assist  farmers  in  adopting  traditional indigenous practices for encouraging all forms of ecological farming, including Zero-Budget Natural  Farming  (ZBNF).  The  scheme  focuses  on  capacity  building,  training,  handholding, and on-field demonstration of natural farming through champion farmers. Under the BPKP, 4.09 lakh ha of land have been brought under Natural farming in 8 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu).

##