# Social Protection for the Rainy Day

## Social protection for the rainy day

- 6.94 While growth can lift people out of the low-income trap, it may not be able to ensure that they no longer remain vulnerable to any crisis situations in their lifetime. Thus, it is important to protect citizens from risks posed by rainy days, such as health issues, natural disasters, old age, etc. Especially in the wake of the hardships posed by the pandemic, the government invested more resources in social protection programmes and continued to do so in the FY23 with the understanding that strong social protection systems can support the growth process. Some of the key programmes/schemes in this area are as listed below.
- 6.95 pradhan mantri Vaya Vandana yojana (pmVVy): PMVVY is offered by the Life Insurance Corporation of India and supported by the Government of India, to provide senior citizens of age 60 years or more an assured minimum pension for a term of 10 years, linked to the price at which they purchase the pension policy. A total number of 8,59,708 subscribers are currently benefitting from the scheme through deposits worth ` 87,081.1 crore collectively under 11,97,159 policies as on 31 December 2022.
- 6.96 pradhan mantri Jeevan Jyoti bima yojana (pmJJy): The  Scheme is available to people in the age group of 18 to 50 years and provides risk coverage of ` 2 lakh in case of death of the insured, due to any reason, at an annual premium of ` 436/. As on 11 January 2023, 14.96 crore persons have been enrolled cumulatively and 6,39,032 claims have been paid under PMJJY.
- 6.97 pradhan mantri Suraksha bima yojana (pmSby): The Scheme is available to people in the age group 18 to 70 years providing a risk coverage of ` 2 lakh in case of accidental death or total permanent disability and ` 1 lakh for partial permanent disability due to accident at a premium of ` 20 per annum. As on 11 January 2023, 32.1 crore persons have been enrolled cumulatively and 1,10,298 claims have been paid under PMSBY.
- 6.98 pradhan mantri Shram yogi maan-dhan yojana (pm-Symdy): Launched in March 2019, the PM-SYMDY is a voluntary and contributory pension scheme for providing a monthly minimum assured pension of ` 3,000 upon attaining the age of 60 years. The workers in the age group of 18 to 40 years having a monthly income of ` 15,000 or less and not a member of EPFO/ ESIC/ NPS (Govt. funded) can join the scheme. As of 2 November 2022, over 49.1 lakh beneficiaries have been enrolled under the Scheme.
- 6.99 pm Street Vendor's atmanirbhar nidhi Scheme (pm SVanidhi): This is a Central Sector  Scheme launched on 1 June 2020, to empower street vendors by extending working capital loans of up to ` 10,000 with a one-year tenure and free onboarding of beneficiaries on digital  payment  platforms.  Beneficiaries  are  also  eligible  for  the  second  tranche  of  loan  up to ` 20,000 with 18 months tenure after timely repayment of the first tranche. The scheme is available for beneficiaries belonging to only those states/ UTs which have notified the Rules and Scheme under the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014. As on 12 January 2023, 45,74,866 loan applications have been sanctioned in all tranches together; out of which 39,43,094 loans have been disbursed.

- 6.100 Further, to provide loans on easier terms for income generating activities, the pradhan mantri mudra yojana (pmmy) was launched in April 2015 to grant loans of up to ` 10 lakh for income-generating manufacturing, trading, and service sectors, including activities allied to agriculture such as poultry, dairy, beekeeping, etc. Under PMMY, both term loan and working capital  requirements  can  be  met.  Loans  are  extended  through  Member  Lending  Institutions (MLIs) viz; Banks, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs). The salient features of the Scheme are:
- Under the aegis of PMMY, MUDRA has created three products namely 'Shishu' (loans up to ` 50,000/-), 'Kishore' (loans above ` 50,000/ and up to ` 5 lakh) and 'Tarun' (loans above ` 5 lakh and up to ` 10 lakh) signify the stage of growth / development and funding needs of the beneficiary micro unit / entrepreneur and also provide a reference point for the next phase of graduation / growth;
- There is no insistence on collateral(s) during sanction of loan;
- Rate of Interest is decided by the lending institution, interest is charged only on the money held overnight by borrower;
- A Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units (CGFMU) was set up for guaranteeing loans extended to eligible micro units under PMMY by MLIs and overdraft loan amount sanctioned under Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) accounts.;
- From FY21 onwards, loans sanctioned to SHGs between ` 10  lakh  to ` 20  lakh  are  also eligible for coverage under CGFMU. The National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd., a wholly-owned company of Government of India is the trustee of the Fund.

## present status

More than 38.4 crore loans, amounting to ` 21.5 lakh crore, have been sanctioned since the launch of the scheme. Out of this, more than 8.2 crore loans amounting to ` 6.8 lakh crore have been extended to new entrepreneurs/ accounts which is approximately 21 per cent of total loans extended under the scheme. About 68 per cent of the loans have been sanctioned to women entrepreneurs.