# Social Infrastructure and Employment: Big Tent

## Social infraStructure and employment: big tent

<!-- image -->

Post the massive, unexpected disruption to human lives caused by the global pandemic, the year 2022 was when humanity once again picked up the threads and took small steps to get back to a semblance of normalcy. However, the challenges posed by the aftermath of this crisis, subsequent waves of the pandemic and the ensuing Russia-Ukraine conflict have impacted the global as well as India's development trajectory. There was a stress on key aspects of social well being of citizens such as health, education and social security etc. and the Government stepped in to continue its support towards social infrastructure development. Standing on the brink of FY23, various indicators of social development appear to have recouped. Focus on long-term goals of human development and 'sabka sath, sabka vikas' have assumed salience. The social sector expenditure outlay of the Centre and State Governments has increased steadily to stand at ₹ 21.3 lakh crore in FY23 (BE), with its share in total General Government expenditure standing at 26.6 per cent.

Demonstrating the on-track progress to attain Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) of halving  poverty  by  2030,  more  than  41  crore  people  exited  poverty  between  2005-06 and 2019-21 according to the UN Mutilidimensional Poverty Index. Bouquet of social protection schemes, customised for different sections of the population such as elderly, unorganised workers, have been prioritised ensuring a shield of dignity for every member of society. The special focus on aspirational districts has resulted in steady improvements across  health,  education,  financial  inclusion,  and  basic  infrastructure.  Transforming welfare through technology, Aadhaar and JAM trinity have revolutionalised the universe of state-citizen interaction, enabling targeted delivery of Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT) through 318 Central schemes and over 720 State DBT schemes, seamless portability of ration card across States through 'One Nation One Ration Card' and national database of unorganised workers 'eShram portal'. The broad-based improvement in employment indicators  is  observed  in  data  covering  both  the  supply  side  and  demand  side  of  the labour market.

Labour  markets  have  recovered  beyond  pre-Covid  levels,  in  both  urban  and  rural areas, as observed in supply-side and demand-side employment data. Quarterly urban employment data shows progress beyond pre-pandemic levels as the unemployment rate declined  from  8.3  per  cent  in  July-September  2019  to  7.2  per  cent  in  July-September 2022. Reflecting rising  formalisation  of  employment,  net  addition  to  EPFO  payroll  is steadily moving upward after swiftly rebounding from Covid-19, with the majority share coming from the youth. As per Annual Survey of Industries 2019-20, employment in the organised manufacturing sector has maintained a steady upward trend over time, with the employment per factory also increasing gradually. Employment has been rising faster

in factories employing more than 100 workers than in smaller ones, suggesting scaling up of manufacturing units. Year-on-Year (YoY) decline in monthly demand for Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) work is emanating from normalisation of the rural economy due to strong agricultural growth and a swift bounce-back from Covid-19.

The noticeable  rise  in  Rural  Female  Labour  Force  Participation  Rate  (FLFPR)  from 19.7 per cent in 2018-19 to 27.7 per cent in 2020-21 is a positive development. Notably, India's female LFPR is likely to be underestimated, with reforms in survey design and content  required  to  capture  the  reality  of  working  females  more  accurately.  Self-Help Groups (SHGs), having demonstrated their resilience and flexibility during Covid, can be an effective conduit to tap the rising willingness of females to work. The 1.2 crore SHGs, comprising of 88 per cent all women SHGs, cater to 14.2 crore households.

On the human capital formation front, the twin pillars of education and health are being strengthened from the core. Within the progressive framework of the National Education Policy (NEP), the improvement in basic facilities in schools and the rising availability of  teachers  is  expected  to  yield  dividends  which  will  enrich  the  nation' s  growth  and development prospects in the decades to come. The Government has also strengthened the  health  infrastructure  and  prepared  itself  to  address  present  and  future  needs  . Ensuring the provision of quality health facilities to citizens, the share of government health expenditure in total health expenditure has increased from 28.6 per cent in FY14 to  40.6  per  cent  in  FY19,  with  a  concomitant  decline  in  out-of-pocket  expenditure  as a  percentage  of  total  health  expenditure  from  64.2  per  cent  in  FY14  to  48.2  per  cent in  FY19.  Augmenting  the  rural  public  healthcare  system,  the  number  of  Sub-centres, Primary Health Centres (PHCs), and Community Health Centres (CHCs) have improved substantially, along with a rise in doctors, nurses, and other medical personnel in the past eight years. Consequently, a host of health-related indicators such as institutional births, immunisation and, coverage of health insurance, have witnessed an uptrend, as borne out by National Family Health Survey (NFHS) data. The progress of the path-breaking Ayushman Bharat programme, with nearly 22 crore beneficiaries, is being further techenabled through digital health IDs 'ABHA' and telemedicine through e-Sanjeevani.

In the Amrit Kaal, the lives of two-thirds of the Indian populace residing in rural India look remarkably better than a few years back, aided by the policy focus on basic amenities and efficient programme implementation. Outcome-oriented statistics concerning the quality of rural lives establish tangible progress in access to electricity, presence of improved drinking water sources, coverage under health insurance schemes, women empowerment, etc. The emphasis on digital land records through SVAMITVA is structural reform in rural land management and individual economic empowerment.

As India marches ahead, the ground lost as regards social sector improvements due to the pandemic has largely been recouped, powered by prompt policymaking and efficient implementation interwoven with technology. Going forward with the vision of 'Minimum Government, Maximum Governance', further developments will hold the key to attaining more equitable economic growth.