# Conclusion

## CONCLUSION

6.54.  As  India  aims  to  achieve  its  ambitious  growth  targets,  it  faces  the  dual  challenge  of meeting energy demands while reducing carbon emissions. Given the close linkage between energy consumption and various social indicators, the Government has a priority to ensure access to sustainable and clean energy sources. Non-fossil fuel sources are critical to India's ambitious NDCs and Net Zero commitment. However, phasing in of non-fossil sources has its  challenges  -  intermittency  related  to  renewables,  handling  of  nuclear  and  solar  panel waste, implications of biofuel production on food security, etc. Depending on the evolving and ambitious NDC targets and the objective of ensuring energy security, it is amply clear that India needs to target a diversified set of energy sources. Such diversification will help minimise risks associated with energy systems while pursuing low-emission pathways in line with national commitments.  The integration of renewables, alongside exploring nuclear energy and biofuels, presents a path towards achieving these objectives. This will also include a significant role for thermal power, especially coal-based power plants, in providing base-load to support largescale deployment of renewables.

6.55.  In exploring the landscape for ensuring energy security, it has become evident that risks are not merely obstacles but also harbingers of opportunities. While uncertainties loom, they present avenues for innovation, adaptation, and growth for India. While phasing in renewables to  the  extent  possible  is  imperative,  in  the  short  to  medium  term,  the  focus  should  also  be on actively adopting clean coal technologies.  The Government's initiatives for (cleaner) coal, such as the Coal Gasification Mission, extraction of Coal Bed Methane gases, exploring Coal to Hydrogen, Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS), and Coal beneficiation through washeries, etc. to mitigate emissions and enhance environmental sustainability needs to be promoted. With the advent of ultra super-critical technologies for coal power plants, it would be possible to lower emissions and achieve higher efficiency.

79 Infrastructure for Resilient Island States (IRIS), UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Sustainable Development, https://sdgs.un.org/partnerships/infrastructure-resilient-island-states-iris.

6.56.  India's successful renewable energy growth story is well-established. Solar power installed capacity has increased drastically by over 25 times between 2014 to 2023. However, several risks are associated with the large-scale phasing-in of renewables, such as intermittency, grid integration, backup power generation, storage, etc. It is important to supplement with other non-fossil fuel sources such as Nuclear, Biofuels, and Hydrogen.

6.57. It  should  not  be  that  India's  high  dependency  on  imports  mainly  for  petroleum  for its energy needs, shifts to high import dependency for Solar PV panels and critical minerals (systemic risks), whose supply chain and geopolitics may be even trickier. India needs to target diversified energy sources, including renewables (Solar, Wind, Large and Small Hydro), green hydrogen, nuclear, and biofuels. Such diversification will help minimise risks associated with energy systems while pursuing low-emission pathways in line with national commitments. The diversification also includes a significant role for thermal power in providing the base load to support large-scale deployment of renewables.

6.58.  Many technologies required for global Net Zero are commercially unavailable, such as hydrogen-fuelled Steel/Cement, Steel and Aluminium production with CCUS, etc. There is a need to enhance international cooperation in R&amp;D, especially in the domains of distributed RE, offshore wind, geothermal, tidal energy, biofuels, Compressed Bio Gas, green hydrogen, energy storage, electrolysers, and nuclear power (including Small Modular Reactors SMR).

6.59.  Availability,  affordability,  and  accessibility  of  financial  resources  will  drive  the  green transition.  While  India  has  relied  upon  its  resources  so  far,  it  is  vital  that  resources  from developed countries and mobilised by the latter flow to the developing countries in line with the objectives of the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement. The negotiations on the New Collective Quantified Goal must lead to outcomes required to meet the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement.  The  global  narrative  on  the  issue  of  climate  change,  describing  it  as  a  climate emergency, shifts focus from the equally, if not more, critical developmental problems and can cause panic. 80,81   The world needs a more balanced approach to the issue of climate change. It should also focus on nearer-term policy goals of improving human welfare rather than being excessively preoccupied with one large, longer-term goal of global climate management.

********

80 Hulme, M. (2023). Climate change isn't everything: Liberating climate politics from alarmism. John Wiley &amp; Sons.

81 V. Anantha Nageswaran, Climate change: Scaring people will only yield scars and no solutions, MINT, (Apr 16, 2024), https://www.livemint.com/opinion/online-views/climate-change-scaring-people-will-only-yield-scarsand-no-solutions-11713237716747.html.