# International Commitments on Climate Finance: The Developments

## INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS ON CLIMATE FINANCE: THE DEVELOPMENTS

6.47.  Lack  of  access  to  adequate  and  affordable  financial  resources  remains  a  significant constraint for developing countries in implementing their climate commitments. The Standing Committee on Finance (a body under the UNFCCC) has estimated that resources from USD 5.8 trillion to USD 11.5 trillion are required till 2030 to meet the targets set by developing countries in  their  NDCs  and  other  communications. The 2023 UN Adaptation Gap Report estimated adaptation costs in developing countries to be 10 to 18 times greater than current international adaptation finance flows of USD 21.3 billion. 73  The UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement mandate that  developed  countries  provide  financial  resources  on  a  grant  or  concessional  basis  and provide access to technologies to developing countries to enable their climate actions. The first GST outcome also underscored the current needs of developing countries and the criticality

72 Notification issued for Green Credit Program (GCP) and Ecomark scheme Under LiFE Initiative to Promote Sustainable Lifestyle and Environmental Conservation, October 13, 2023, PIB, https://pib.gov.in/ PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1967476

73 United Nations Environment Programme (2023). Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced. Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves the world exposed. Nairobi. https://doi.org/1 0.59117/20.500.11822/43796.

of new and additional, grant-based, highly concessional finance and non-debt instruments in supporting developing countries. The finance flows to developing countries from developed nations  have  been  very  meagre.  Currently,  most  of  the  international  finance  available  for developing countries is in the form of loans rather than grants.

6.48.  The preliminary estimates of the overall resource requirement, as stated in the country's NDC, is USD 2.5 trillion for 2015-2030. The Long-Term Low Emission Development Strategy (LT-LEDS) submitted by the country highlighted that financial resources of the order of tens of trillions of dollars would be required by 2050 for India's transition towards a low-carbon development  pathway.  India's  1st  Adaptation  Communication  (AC)  submitted  to  UNFCCC mentioned the cumulative need for expenditure for adaptation to be ₹56.68 trillion by 2030. However, much of the resource flow for climate action - mitigation and adaptation - is primarily from domestic resources.

6.49.  Available, accessibile and affordable financial resources are essential to meet the needs of developing countries. UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement mandate that developed countries provide  the  resources  and  take  the  lead  in  mobilising  finance  through  various  sources. However, much of the climate action by developing countries has been done through domestic resources, and the emphasis of the developed countries has mainly been on private finance taking the lead in financing climate action. Given the scale of financial requirements, the ability of private capital to meet the needs even partially remains debatable. Further, the cost of such capital would have implications on the macroeconomic stability of the developing countries. While recognising the importance of private capital, a working paper by the Centre for Social and Economic Progress 74  identifies various challenges for developing countries in attracting it such as limited depth of their financial markets and vulnerable debt profiles. There is further evidence 75  to suggest that even MDBs mobilised less than a dollar from the private sector for every dollar of committed finance by MDBs for climate action. As reflected in an article in the Financial Times'There's too much to do, and given the urgency and the need to get the solution right, this isn't a task for …. favourite ESG-focused portfolio manager … The sheer scale of the physical infrastructure that must be revamped, demolished or replaced is almost beyond comprehension. Governments, …, will have to lead …. The Western nations that did so much of the damage will have to finance the transition in the developing world - it is astonishing that this idea is still debated .' 76

## CoP 28 and the Global Stocktake

6.50.  The 28th session of the Conference of Parties (COP 28) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was held in Dubai, UAE. The primary outcome of COP 28 included the decision on the outcome of the first GST, which seeks to ratchet up global climate ambition before the end of the decade, implemented in a nationally determined manner, taking into account the Paris Agreement and their different national circumstances. Another

74 Natarajan, G., and Anantha Nageswaran, V., (2023). Harnessing private capital for global public goods: Issues, challenges and solutions (CSEP Working Paper 57). New Delhi: Centre for Social and Economic Progress, https:// csep.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/Harnessing-private-capital-for-global-public-goods-1.pdf.

75  2019  Joint  report  on  multilateral  development  banks  climate  finance.  (2020).  https://www.ebrd.com/2019joint-report-on-mdbs-climate-finance.

76 Brower, D., Chu, A. &amp; McCormick, M, The energy transition will be volatile, The Financial Times, (2023, June 29). https://www.ft.com/content/86d71297-3f34-48f3-8f3f-28b7e8be03c6.

significant  outcome  of  COP  28  is  the  agreement  on  operationalising  the  Loss  and  Damage Fund and its funding arrangements. In line with the mandate under the Paris Agreement to develop a Global Goal for Adaptation (GGA), COP 28 finalised the Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience. The decision calls for all countries to have adaptation plans by 2030. Parties agreed on targets for the Global Goal on Adaptation, reflecting a global consensus on adaptation  targets  and  the  need  for  finance,  technology,  and  capacity-building  support  to achieve them.

6.51. Under the first GST, the Parties took decisions on different themes of climate action, viz., mitigation,  adaptation,  and  means  of  implementation,  including  finance,  capacity  building, technology development, and technology transfer. Under finance, the GST decision recalls that developed country Parties shall provide financial resources to assist developing country Parties in  continuing their obligations concerning mitigation and adaptation under the Convention (UNFCCC). The decision also recognises that adaptation finance must be significantly scaled up to support the urgent and evolving need to accelerate adaptation and build resilience in developing countries. Under mitigation, the decision calls upon Parties to contribute to the tripling of global renewable energy capacity, accelerating efforts towards the phase-down of unabated coal power, phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, etc. These decisions are to be implemented in a nationally determined manner, taking into account the different national circumstances, pathways, and approaches of the Parties. The decision also noted that measures taken to combat climate change, including unilateral ones, should not constitute arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on international trade.

## New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG)

6.52.  A New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG) on climate finance is being negotiated under the UNFCCC to decide an annual goal of climate finance to be mobilised by the developed countries for the developing countries from 2025 onward. The mandate is to set a new quantified goal from the floor of USD 100 billion per year, considering the needs and priorities of developing countries aiming to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. Developing countries seek a) an ambitious mobilisation goal that adequately addresses their needs, b) grant-based or highly concessional  and  accessible  financial  resources,  and  c)  a  balance  between  the  financing  of mitigation and adaptation actions. These aspects have also been articulated in the discussions under the Indian presidency of the G20 and are duly reflected in the Delhi Declaration.