# India's International Initiatives to Address Climate Change Issues

## INDIA'S INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES TO ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE ISSUES

6.53.   India has led several international initiatives towards climate change mitigation and building resilience. Some of these are discussed as follows:

1.  The International Solar Alliance (ISA) was established by a joint initiative of India and France in 2015 to deploy solar energy solutions. It is a treaty-based inter-governmental organisation with 119 Member and Signatory countries. The organisation aims to unlock USD one trillion of investments in solar by 2030 by crowding in private sector investment through guarantees, buildings capacities and through measures to reduce the cost of technology adoption. Its

programmatic support has identified a pipeline of 9.5 GW of solar energy capacity in its member countries.  ISA  assists  in  setting  up  solar  energy  demonstration  projects  with  a grant of USD 50,000 for its Members categorised as Least Developed Countries (LDCs) or Small Island Developing States (SIDS). As of March 2024, 19 solar energy demonstration projects are under implementation. ISA also works on capacity building, and as part of this effort,  around  4,000  professionals  from  around  the  globe  have  been  trained  on  various aspects of the solar energy industry. ISA has successfully established the Solar Technology and Application Resources Centres (STAR-C) in Ethiopia and Somalia.

2.  One World, One Sun, One Grid (OSOWOG) is an ambitious project led by India and the UK to interconnect solar energy systems on a massive scale. The vision behind the OSOWOG is the mantra that 'the sun never sets', and the idea is to harness solar and other renewable energy sources from different parts of the world, where the sun is shining at any given moment, and efficiently transmit that power to areas where it is needed. The OSOWOG initiative is to be carried out in three phases. In the first phase, the Indian grid would be connected to the Middle East, South Asia, and South-East Asia grids to develop a common grid. The second phase would connect the functional first phase to the pool of renewable resources in Africa, and finally, the third phase would look at achieving true global interconnection with the aim of 2,600 GW of interconnection by 2050.  77
3.  The Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) was launched by India during the United Nations Climate Action Summit on 23 September 2019. It is a global partnership of National Governments, UN agencies and programmes, multilateral development banks and financing mechanisms, the private sector, and academic and knowledge institutions that aims to promote the resilience of new and existing infrastructure systems to climate and disaster risks in support of sustainable development. CDRI aims to enhance infrastructure resilience through capacity building, informed policy, planning, and management, leading to improved quality of the environment, livelihoods, and lives of over three billion people by 2050. The organisation released its first Biennial Report on Global Infrastructure Resilience in  2023.  It  is  CDRI's  contribution  towards  monitoring  the  SDGs,  the  Paris  Agreement, and the Sendai Framework targets. Other interventions include financial support for peer learning, capacity development opportunities and sectoral programs on power, transport, telecommunication, health, and urban infrastructure.  Further,  11  projects  were  awarded across 13 SIDS in 2023, in partnership with USAID and Miyamoto International, under the Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (DRI) connect, a one-stop digital knowledge exchange, learning, and co-creation platform. The Infrastructure Resilience Academic Exchange (IRAX) Programme has been conceived as a structured engagement initiative with global academic institutions  to  offer  value-added  education,  research  opportunities,  and  professional development on DRI. As part of this, in 2023, USD 5 million was provided by USAID to support a partnership between US universities and Indian higher education institutions to offer education, research, training, and professional development opportunities on DRI.  78

77  One  World,  One  Sun,  One  Grid  (OSOWOG),  International  Solar  Alliance,  https://isolaralliance.org/work/ osowog/

78 Based on information received from the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI)

4.  The Infrastructure for Resilient Island States' (IRIS), led by India, is a flagship strategic initiative  of  CDRI  and  Small  Island  Developing  States  (SIDS)  designed  to  achieve  and deliver  resilience  and  climate  adaptation  solutions  to  the  SIDS,  which  are  among  the most vulnerable and exposed countries. Launched in 2021, IRIS is already supported by commitments of USD 35 million from Australia, India, the EU, and the UK, with a target to attract and deploy USD 50 million to support SIDS by 2030.  79
5.  Realising the importance of partnership between the Government and industry to achieve the goal of Net Zero, the Leadership Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT) was launched by the governments of India and Sweden in September 2019. LeadIT brings together countries and companies committed to action to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. At COP 28, India and Sweden launched the second LeadIT (LeadIT 2.0) phase for 2024-26, marking a joint commitment by member countries and companies to shape policy frameworks and international cooperation for an inclusive industry transition. This new phase will focus on inclusive and just industry transition, co-development &amp; transfer of low-carbon technology, and financial support for industry transition in emerging economies.