# Conclusion and Outlook

## conclusion and outlook

9.54 Despite  global  headwinds,  industrial  production  expanded  during  FY23,  backed  by sustained demand conditions. The growth in bank credit has kept pace with industrial growth, with a sequential surge evident since January 2022. Credit to MSMEs has seen a significant increase in part, assisted by the introduction of the ECLGS.  Amidst heightened global uncertainty, FDI in the manufacturing sector moderated in the first half of FY23. However, inflows stayed well above the pre-pandemic levels, driven by structural reforms and measures improving the ease of doing business, making India one of the most attractive FDI destinations in the world.

9.55 On the positive side, easing input cost pressures owing to a fall in international commodity prices augurs well for company margins. Capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector has been rising. It bodes well for new investment activity in creating additional capacity. Credit growth in the industry has also increased remarkably, suggesting that prospects for Capex investments by companies are brighter. The PLI schemes are set to unlock manufacturing capacity, boost exports, reduce import dependence and lead to job creation for both skilled and unskilled labour. On the downside, exports are slowing down and are likely to moderate along with the probable global economic slowdown. Volatile international commodity prices and supply disruptions in raw materials  can  weigh  on  industrial  growth  in  the  wake  of  new  disruptions  at  the  global level.  The  re-emergence  of  Covid-19  in  China  can  trigger  supply  chain  disruptions,  as  was the case during the pandemic period. On the other hand, if China returns to normalcy from Covid-19, there can be an increase in commodity demand - thus reversing the recent decline in commodity prices. Of course, the strength and duration of the recovery in commodity prices will be a function of many factors, such as the pace of China's economic recovery and growth outlook in North America and Europe. Notwithstanding such open questions, industrial output in India should continue to grow steadily based on resilient domestic demand.