# Industry: Steady Recovery

## INDUSTRY: STeaDY RecoveRY

<!-- image -->

The industry holds a prominent position in the Indian economy contributing about 30 percent  of  total  gross  value  added  in  the  country.  In  FY23,  the  Indian  industry  faced some extraordinary challenges as the Russian-Ukraine conflict broke out. That led to a sharp rise in the prices of many commodities. Prices of edible oil, crude oil, fertilisers and food grains rose sharply. They remained at elevated levels for several months. The risk of another round of supply chain disruptions emerged, but they were not as severe as feared. Nonetheless, both the price and the availability of essential commodities had the potential to dent the industry' s optimism on consolidating the recovery of FY22 and further accelerating it. It is fair to say that the Indian industry acquitted itself rather well under trying circumstances. Overall Gross Value Added (GVA) by the Industrial Sector, based on data available for the first half of the FY23, rose 3.7 per cent, which is higher than the average growth of 2.8 per cent achieved in H1 of the last decade.

Robust domestic conditions since FY22 have provided a demand stimulus to industrial growth. Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) as a share of GDP in H1 of FY23 was the highest among all half years, H1 or H2, since FY15. Further, the strong export performance of FY22 continued somewhat in the first half of FY23. In this half of the year, exports of goods and services as a share of GDP have been the highest since FY16. However, the performance began to wane in the first half itself as the Year-on-Year (YoY) growth of exports declined from Q1 to Q2 due to persistently high inflation and rising interest rates in the advanced economies. The increase in investment demand has emerged as another powerful stimulus to industrial growth. It has been triggered by the augmented capex of the central government in the current and the previous year as compared to the pre-pandemic years. The leap also has crowded in private investment, already upbeat on the pent-up demand, export stimulus, and strengthening of the corporate balance sheets.

The supply response of the industry to the demand stimulus has been robust, as seen in high-frequency indicators. PMI manufacturing has remained in the expansion zone for 18 months since July 2021, and its sub-indices indicate an easing of input cost pressures, improving supplier delivery times, robust export orders, and future output. While growth in  the  consumer durables component of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is on account of the release of 'pent-up' demand, the increase in capital goods and infrastructure/ construction goods is indicative of the beginnings of a virtuous investment cycle that is expected to be led by the private sector. The growth of the eight core industries of coal, fertilisers, cement, electricity, steel, and refinery products has held steady, reflecting a broad momentum in industrial activity. However, the manufacturing landscape further shows uneven growth across various categories, with industries such as automobiles and

electronics registering impressive performances while sectors such as textiles have been showing tepid growth, as export demand for these products has been mellowing with the slowing of global output and demand.

Industrial activity has been supported by an upswing in bank credit to the sector. Credit to industry started recovering from the beginning of the year and has been growing in double digits since July 2022. Credit to MSMEs has also seen a significant increase in part,  assisted  by  the  introduction  of  the  Emergency  Credit  Linked  Guarantee  Scheme (ECLGS).  While  the  growth  in  total  credit  has  been  driven  by  an  increase  in  credit demanded by MSMEs, large industries have begun to increase the pace of their credit offtake too since the beginning of FY23 as they look to reduce their pace of capital raising from volatile  debt  and  equity  markets.  The  robust  growth  in  credit  demand  combined with rising capacity utilisation and investment in manufacturing underscores businesses' optimism regarding future demand.

Amidst heightened global uncertainty, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the manufacturing sector moderated in the first half of FY23. However, inflows stayed well above the pre-pandemic levels, driven by structural reforms and measures improving the ease of doing business, making India one of the most attractive FDI destinations in the world.

The electronics industry continues to ascend in importance as its applications become pervasive. Electronics, supported by continuously improving communication services, will significantly enhance productivity, efficient service delivery, and social transformation. This industry's significant growth drivers are mobile phones, consumer electronics, and industrial electronics. In the mobile phone segment, India has become the second-largest mobile phone manufacturer globally, with the production of handsets going up from 6 crore units in FY15 to 29 crore units in FY21.

The Indian Pharmaceuticals industry plays a prominent role in the global pharmaceuticals industry. India is ranked 3rd worldwide in the production of pharma products by volume and  14th  by  value.  The  sector  is  the  largest  provider  of  generic  medicines  globally, occupying a 20 per cent share in global supply by volume, and is also the leading vaccine manufacturer globally with a market share of 60 per cent. The performance of pharma exports has been robust, sustaining positive growth despite the global trade disruptions and drop in demand for Covid-19-related treatments. The cumulative FDI in the pharma sector crossed the US$ 20 billion mark by September 2022.

The pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine conflict have demonstrated the risk of supply chain shocks to the global economic order. As companies adapt their manufacturing and supply chain strategies to build resilience, India has a unique opportunity to become a global manufacturing hub this decade. In this context, the government's Make-in-India initiative has facilitated investment, fostered innovation and built world-class infrastructure while addressing  the  gaps  in  domestic  manufacturing  capabilities.  The  Production  Linked Incentive  (PLI)  schemes  across  14  categories  has  further  complemented  it  with  an estimated Capex of around ₹3 lakh crore over the next five years and the potential to generate over 60 lakh jobs. In the medium term, the scheme will help reduce net imports by building domestic manufacturing capacity that will cater to domestic and global needs.