# Introduction

## introduction

- 7.1 Climate  change  is  the  long-term  change  in  temperature  and  weather  patterns  that  can occur due to natural reasons, but since the beginning of the industrial revolution in the 19 th century, it has been predominantly due to anthropogenic activities. GHG emissions remain in the  atmosphere for  tens  to  hundreds  of  years,  trapping  the  sun's  heat  from  escaping. While within limits, these make our earth more habitable, allowing for salubrious weather conditions, the enhanced emissions have led to rising temperatures with the potential to bring about sea level rise, change monsoon cycles and impact land systems.
- 7.2 GHG emissions are the most significant threat to humanity and the inescapable reality the world faces. Action to reduce carbon emissions and adapt to the changing climatic conditions are required urgently as the world has already started to experience its consequences. For instance, it is estimated that by 2030, about 700 million people worldwide will be at risk of displacement by drought alone (U.N. SDG Portal). Thus, global warming is a reality, and so is climate change. Nor is there much doubt that human activity is primarily responsible for it this time, although climate change occurred in the distant past even when Planet Earth was scarcely populated.
- 7.3 Despite agreement on the above, there can still be much divergence about what comes next and what to do about it when it comes to climate change. Much of the global angst associated with climate change is about the emission of GHGs and carbon, in particular. The more GHGs are emitted, the more they stay trapped in the atmosphere, accelerating global warming. Hence, the argument goes that if some of the cataclysmic consequences are to be avoided, then global warming must be arrested, slowed and, if possible, reversed. One way to strive for it is to reduce emissions of GHG, including carbon. Many nations pledge to reduce their net emission to zero by 2050. Some wish to achieve it by 2060 and by 2070.

Figure vii.1: net Zero Pledges of countries (the Year pledged is on top of the bars)

<!-- image -->

Source: Emissions Gap Report 2022, UNEP

- 7.4 However,  this  is  where  things  begin  to  get  interesting.  Science  is  not  very  clear  on whether further emission reduction would necessarily guarantee a stoppage or reversal of global warming.  The reason being much carbon dioxide and other GHGs have already been emitted over the last two and half centuries of industrialisation-led economic growth in today's advanced nations, principally in North America and Europe. The share of developing countries in the stock of GHGs (usually measured as carbon dioxide equivalent) has been minimal compared to developed countries. This is corroborated by the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which highlights that the challenges faced due to global warming are mainly due to cumulative historical and current GHG emissions of developed countries. The impact of the accumulation would also be iniquitous, with the developing countries not only bearing the brunt of climate change but also constrained by their capacity to respond to its challenges. The IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) notes that high human vulnerability global hotspots are found particularly  in West,  Central  &amp;  East Africa,  South Asia,  Central,  and  South America,  Small Island Developing States, and the Arctic.
- 7.5 Further, as per the report, Asia is most vulnerable to climate change, especially to extreme heat, flooding, sea level rise, and erratic rainfall. Ironically, the burden of adaptation is highest for those who have contributed the least to global warming. That unfortunate inevitability means that the stock of GHGs in the atmosphere may have already set a train of events that future emission reduction could do very little to stop or reverse.
- 7.6 Even if the answer to this question is unclear or unknown, some correctly argue that not doing whatever we can to make the planet more liveable and less dangerous may amount to criminal negligence. The problem is that the people and nations making this argument have their priorities correct for themselves but not for the countries yet to climb the ladder of prosperity. It is an enduring principle of economics that resources have competing uses and that there are always trade-offs.
- 7.7 Today's developing nations are therefore caught in the horns of a dilemma. How much resources to devote to bread-and-butter developmental priorities and to adapting to the already changing  climate,  and  how  much  to  dedicate  to  mitigating  emissions  of  GHGs?  Today's developed nations have prospered through the unrestricted use of fossil fuels, including coal, crude oil, and natural gas. It is theoretically elegant to argue that switching to renewable or nonfossil fuel energy would generate investments and jobs. Still, it seldom works out so smoothly in practice.
- 7.8 For example, China has declared that future energy supplies, including alternative ones, must  be  secured  first  before  dispensing  with  existing  energy  sources.  Countries  might  find themselves not scrapping coal-fired power plants, and the alternatives may be held up either due to a lack of technology, financial resources, skilled and trained human resources, or some combination of all three. Countries have also learnt that the jobs that are likely to be created in the so-called 'green economy' are tilted towards skill and technology-intensive than in traditional industries. 1 One may also argue that it may be easier to speak of retraining and relocating people than actually doing so.

- 7.9 Nobel Laureate Thomas Schelling (2005) argued that the most effective way to combat climate change was to let nations grow first 2 :
- 'If  per  capita  income  growth  in  the  next  40  years  compares  with  the  40  years  just  past, vulnerability  to  climate  change  should  diminish,  and  the  resources  available  for  adaptation should be greater. I say this not to minimise concern about climate change but to anticipate whether  developing  countries  should  make  sacrifices  in  their  development  to  minimise  the emission of gases that may change the climate to their disadvantage. Their best defence against climate change may be their own continued development.'
- 7.10  That  economic  growth  would  enable  resource  generation  will  come  as  no  surprise  to students of corporate finance. Companies generate profits and internal resources and thus fund their investments. For companies worldwide, the single biggest source of finance for their capital investments is their own resources before they turn to markets. That would work for nations too.
- 7.11  Another  reason  why  it  is  a  realistic  proposition  is  that  securing  funding  from  either developed nations or multilateral organisations is rather difficult. Public finances in developed countries are stretched and do not seem to have the intent to mobilise adequate resources for climate action in developing countries. They also do not have the appetite to provide additional capital to multilateral institutions for them to be able to lend more or mobilise greater resources. Further,  the  willingness  and  incentives-alignment  of  the  private  sector  to  undertake  longgestation projects are questionable at best or non-existent at worst.
- 7.12  Lastly, it does not seem so strange or irresponsible that developing countries must put their own growth and development aspirations ahead of their global climate obligations when one considers that developed countries set aside their obsessive concerns about climate change and global warming to burn more coal to generate electricity this year. Aiming to reduce their dependence on Russian crude oil and natural gas, countries in Europe had to switch to coal to keep their homes warm and well-lit 3 . The behaviour of European nations in 2022, eminently understandable, demonstrates the return of energy security as a prime requirement for countries. Therefore, it stands to reason that it would be no different for developing economies too.
- 7.13  Earlier  in  the  year,  the  OECD  and  the  Social  Economics  Lab  at  Harvard  teamed  up to  understand  why  policies  to  address  climate  change  have  been  difficult  to  implement  and surveyed  over  40,000  respondents  across  20  of  the  world's  most  carbon-emitting  countries (representing 72 per cent of global CO 2 emissions). The findings were striking 4 .  In  general, citizens in developed countries expressed considerable reluctance to change their lifestyles and habits with respect to driving, flying and eating that would contribute to reduced emissions. Policies to implement carbon pricing have not been easy in all European countries. France tried and retreated in 2018. Switzerland's proposal was defeated in a referendum in 2021.

2 Thomas C. Schelling (1992): 'Some economics of global warming', American Economic Review, March 1992 Some Economics of Global Warming on JSTOR

3 'Germany Revives Coal as Energy Security Trumps Climate Goals', Bloomberg, 22 December 2022 (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/ articles/2022-12-22/germany-returns-to-coal-as-energy-security-trumps-climate-goals)

4 'Fighting Climate Change: International Attitudes Toward Climate Policies', NBER Working Paper No. 30265, September 2022 (https:// www.nber.org/papers/w30265)

- 7.14  As though these challenges are not enough, many experts also warn of the availability of rare earth elements (REE) and critical minerals (CM) to be the next geopolitical battleground as crude oil has been over the last fifty years. 5  As we are aware, REE and CM are essential for generating renewable energy. The problem is that they are produced in a few countries and processed in even fewer countries. A globally synchronised energy transition to non-fossil fuels might be difficult to pull off if adequate REE and CM are not available. That would leave the fossil fuel-based assets stranded for many countries' economies!
- 7.15  Jean  Pisani-Ferry,  associated  with  the  Bruegel  Institute  and  an  advisor  to  the  French Government,  has  begun  to  sound  the  alarm  about  climate  change's  significant  short-run macroeconomic costs. Citing him in his article for the International Monetary Fund's 'Finance and Development', Daniel Yergin writes 6 ,
- ' The economist Jean Pisani-Ferry, cofounder of Bruegel, Europe's leading economic think tank, has observed that accelerating the targets for net carbon emission reductions too aggressively could  create  much  larger  economic  disruptions  than  generally  anticipated-what  he  called 'an adverse supply shock-very much like the shocks of the 1970s.' Such a transition, PisaniFerry presciently wrote in 2021, just before the current energy crisis began, is 'unlikely to be benign and policymakers should get ready for tough choices.' He subsequently added, in 2022: 'Climate action has become a major macroeconomic issue, but the macroeconomics of climate action is far from the level of rigour and precision that is now necessary to provide a sound basis for public discussions and to guide policymakers adequately. For understandable reasons, advocacy has too often taken precedence over analysis. But at this stage of the  discussion, complacent  scenarios  have  become  counterproductive.  The  policy  conversation  now  needs methodical, peer-examined assessments of the potential costs and benefits of alternative plans for action. '
- 7.16  However, whether we like it or not, the climate change issue will be increasingly relevant and will occupy the airwaves and the attention of policymakers. Countries, even if they wait for financial, technological and human resources for emissions mitigation, have to take action to make their people resilient and adapt to climate change. So, actions on multiple fronts are needed, including the estimation of resources, lifestyle adjustments etc.
- 7.17  Here, India, considered to be one of the most vulnerable countries given its long coastline, monsoon-dependent agriculture, and large agrarian economy, is one of the leading examples of this. It has contributed only 4 per cent (until 2019) to the cumulative global emissions and its per capita emission is far less than the world average.
- 7.18  The fact that climate change is a global phenomenon and requires collective efforts has been widely accepted and is the basis of the commitments in the United Nations Framework Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  and  its  Paris  Agreement.  Recognising  the differentiated responsibility of countries (in view of their role in GHG emissions) and the higher developmental needs of the developing countries, they call for a collective action based on the

5 'The new-style energy crisis', Daniel Yergin interviewed by Project Syndicate, July 2022 (https://www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/newstyle-energy-crisis-by-daniel-yergin-2022-07)

6 Daniel Yergin (2022): 'Bumps in the Energy Transition', Finance &amp; Development, International Monetary Fund, December 2022 (https:// www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2022/12/bumps-in-the-energy-transition-yergin)

principles of equity and Common But Differentiated Responsibility and Respective Capabilities (CBDR-RC). The collective action has translated into NDCs-through which each country has made a commitment to work towards a collective goal of keeping temperature rise to below 2° C above pre-industrial levels.

- 7.19  India has been striving to pursue the goal of sustainable development. It spearheads one of the most robust climate actions through its NDCs, which includes an ambitious programme for transitions to clean energy in the world. Despite the adverse impacts of Covid-19 on the economy, the country has enhanced its climate ambition manifold and embarked on a long-term strategy towards a low GHG emission based development.
- 7.20  Having set the context, this chapter presents an updated discussion on the issue of climate change from India's perspective, including a discussion on forests and their role in mitigating carbon emissions, an approach to transition to renewable energy and the recently submitted low emissions development strategy. The chapter further presents a discussion on the outcomes of the 27 th session of the Conference of Parties (COP 27), progress made on enabling financing for sustainable development and India's role in global efforts towards addressing climate change. Besides this, recent changes in environmental regulations and other environmental aspects, such as biodiversity and wildlife, are also discussed.