# Outlook

## OUTLOOK

1.52  The  Indian  economy  recovered  swiftly  from  the  pandemic,  with  its  real  GDP  in  FY24 being 20 per cent higher than the pre-COVID, FY20 levels. This meant a CAGR of 4.6 per cent from FY20, despite a 5.8 per cent decline in FY21 inflicted by the pandemic. Analysis in this chapter shows that the current GDP level is close to the pre-pandemic trajectory in Q4FY24. During the decade ending FY20, India grew at an average annual rate of 6.6 per cent, more or less reflecting the long-run growth prospects of the economy. This is the background against which we can see the prospects for FY25.

1.53  IMF projects the global economy to grow at 3.2 per cent in 2024, with risks being broadly balanced. The average annual global growth was 3.7 per cent during the decade ending FY20. Inflationary pressures have moderated in most economies with declining global commodity prices and easing of supply chain pressures. However, core inflation remains sticky and driven by high service inflation. Many central banks have hinted at the peaking of the interest rate hike cycle. The ECB has already cut the policy rate, while the Fed has hinted at reducing the rate in 2024. If the services inflation across economies moderates faster, that may allow central banks to bring forward the monetary policy easing cycle earlier than currently anticipated. A likely reduction in policy rates by central banks of AEs, especially the Fed, will open the space for central banks of EMEs to follow the lead, bringing down the cost of capital.

1.54  On  the  downside,  any  escalation  of  geopolitical  conflicts  in  2024  may  lead  to  supply dislocations, higher commodity prices, reviving inflationary pressures and stalling monetary policy  easing  with  potential  repercussions  for  capital  flows.  This  can  also  influence  RBI's monetary policy stance. The global trade outlook for 2024 remains positive, with merchandise trade  expected  to  pick  up  after  registering  a  contraction  in  volumes  in  2023.  Conversely, increased  fragmentation  along  geopolitical  lines  and  renewed  thrust  on  protectionism  may distort merchandise trade growth, impacting India's external sector. Global financial markets have scaled new heights, with investors betting on global economic expansion. However, any corrections in the elevated financial market valuations may have ramifications for household finances  and  corporate  valuation,  negatively  impacting  growth  prospects.  Hiring  in  the information technology sector had slowed down considerably in FY24, and even if hiring does not decline further, it is unlikely to pick up significantly. However, leveraging the initiatives taken by the government and capturing the untapped potential in emerging markets, exports of business, consultancy and IT-enabled services can expand. Despite the core inflation rate being around 3 per cent, the RBI, with one eye on the withdrawal of accommodation and another on the US Fed, has kept interest rates unchanged for quite some time, and the anticipated easing has been delayed.

1.55  Domestic  growth  drivers  have  supported  economic  growth  in  FY24  despite  uncertain global economic performance. Improved balance sheets will help the private sector cater to strong investment demand. A note of caution is warranted here. Private capital formation after good growth in the last three years may turn slightly more cautious because of fears of cheaper

imports  from  countries  that  have  excess  capacity.  While  merchandise  exports  are  likely  to increase with improving growth prospects in AEs, services exports are also likely to witness a further uptick. A normal rainfall forecast by the India Meteorological Department and the satisfactory spread of the southwest monsoon thus far are likely to improve agriculture sector performance and support the revival of rural demand. However, the monsoon season still has some ways to go. Structural reforms such as the GST and the IBC have also matured and are delivering envisaged results. Considering these factors, the Survey conservatively projects a real GDP growth of 6.5-7 per cent, with risks evenly balanced, cognizant of the fact that the market expectations are on the higher side.

********