# Food processing sector (FPI): Processing Potential

## FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR (FPI): PROCESSING POTENTIAL

9.39  India is the largest producer of milk and the second largest producer of fruits, vegetables and sugar. The availability of reasonably priced agricultural inputs, the vast labour force, and continuously  growing  consumer  demand  provide  the  essential  elements  for  a  robust  food processing industry.  The sector also plays a vital role in reducing the wastage of perishable agricultural  produce,  enhancing  the  shelf  life  of  food  products,  ensuring  value  addition  to agricultural  produce,  and  incentivises  diversification  &amp;  commercialisation  of  agriculture. True to that, the food processing industry in India is one of the largest employers in organised manufacturing, with a 12.02 per cent share in the total employment in the organised sector 45 . The value of agri-food exports, including processed food exports during 2022-23, was USD46.44 Billion, accounting for about 11.7 per cent of India's total exports. The share of processed food exports also increased from 14.9 per cent in 2017-18 to 23.4 per cent in 2022-23.

9.40  It is an important industry because it has strong linkages with the agriculture sector and can employ surplus workforce released from the agriculture sector.  During the last eight years ending 2022-23, the food processing industries has been growing at an average annual growth rate (AAGR) of around 5.35 per cent at 2011-12 prices. Being labour-intensive, the pandemic adversely  affected  the  sector  and  it  is  now  recovering.  GVA  in  the  food  processing  sector has increased from ₹ 1.30 lakh Crore in 2013-14 to ₹ 1.92 lakh Crore in 2022-23. The sector constituted 7.66 per cent of GVA in Manufacturing in 2022-23 at 2011-12 prices.

<!-- image -->

Source: MoFPI

9.41  The Government has taken several initiatives to improve the supply chain management from  farm  gates  to  retail  outlets.  The  Production  Linked  Incentive  Scheme  for  the  Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) supports the creation of global food manufacturing champions, branding and marketing abroad. It is expected to create off-farm employment and provide better prices for farm produce and higher income to farmers. Presently, 173 applications are covered under the PLI Scheme. The beneficiaries of the scheme have invested ₹7.69 Thousand Crore. An incentive amount to the tune of ₹1.07 Thousand Crore was released in FY 2021-22 and FY 2022-23.

9.42  The  PM  Formalization  of  Micro  Food  Processing  Enterprises  (PMFME)  scheme  with a  total  outlay  of  ₹10  Thousand  Crore  provides  credit-linked  subsidy  and  capacity  building, including  marketing  and  branding  support.    Convergence  is  being  sought  with  the  existing ecosystem to support and complement other schemes such as the National Rural Livelihood Mission,  National  Urban  Livelihood  Mission,  One  District  One  Product,  AIF,  and  PMKSY implementation. All State/UTs have appointed a state nodal agency, constituted state level approval  committee  &amp;  district  level  committee  for  implementation  of  the  scheme.  Further, 2 national level technical institutes and 44 state level technical institutes in 36 States/ UTs have also been approved. Against the target of two lakhs, 3,53,608 applications were received, and a loan amount of ₹ 6.94 Thousand Crore to 86,342 applicants was sanctioned. 522 Master Trainers from 35 States/UTs and 1068 District Level Trainers from 26 States/UTs and 70,936 beneficiaries from 30 States/UTs have been trained.

9.43  The scheme for developing the Tomato, Onion and Potato (TOP) value chain was launched in 2018-19. The coverage of Operation Green has been expanded from 3 crops (tomato, onion &amp; potato) to 22 perishables crops, which include 10 fruits, 11 vegetables (including TOP) and one marine, i.e. shrimp. The scheme's objectives include enhancing farmers' value realisation, reducing  post-harvest  losses,  increasing  food  processing  capacities,  and  adding  value.  The scheme has two-pronged strategies: Price Stabilization Measures (short-term measures) and Integrated Value Chain Development Projects (long-term). Under the short-term interventions of the scheme, there is a provision for a 50 per cent subsidy on the cost of transportation and storage for fruits &amp; vegetables for evacuation of surplus production from production centres during the glut situation. For the long-term, grant-in-aid is provided in the range 35 per cent to 50 per cent for setting up food processing project for eligible crops in the identified production clusters in major producing states.

## FOOD MANAGEMENT 46 : SOCIAL NET FOR FOOD SECURITY

9.44  The  main  objectives  of  food  management  are  the  procurement  of  foodgrains  from farmers at remunerative prices, the distribution of foodgrains to consumers, particularly to the  vulnerable  sections  of  society,  at  affordable  prices,  and  the  maintenance  of  food  buffer stocks for food security and price stability. The instruments used are procurement at MSP from farmers and Central Issue Price (CIP) for consumers. The nodal agency that undertakes the procurement, distribution, and storage of food grain is the Food Corporation of India (FCI).

46 Food Price Inflation is covered under Chapter 5- Prices and Inflation

For prudent management of foodgrain stock and for ensuring adequate availability of wheat and rice in the central pool, the Central Government implements a decentralized procurement scheme.

9.45  As of 24 May 2024, procurement of wheat during the Rabi Marketing Season(RMS) 202425 is  going  smoothly in the major procuring States nationwide, with 263.33 LMT of wheat already procured for the central pool, surpassing last year's total procurement of 262.02 LMT. A total of 22.42 lakh farmers have been benefitted during RMS 2024-25. Similarly, 489.20 LMT of rice was procured directly from 98.26 lakh farmers during the Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) 2023-24. With the above procurement quantity, the combined stock of wheat and rice in central pool has surpassed 600 LMT, which puts the country in a comfortable position to meet its requirements for food grains.

9.46  The distribution of food grains is undertaken primarily under the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) and other welfare schemes of the Government of India, including PMGKAY. The government has addressed the issue of food security at the household level for a long time through the public distribution system and the targeted public distribution system, as well as the enactment of the NFSA 2013. Further, the Government decided to continue to provide free food grains to about 81.35 crore beneficiaries (i.e., Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) households and Priority Households (PHH) beneficiaries) under the PMGKAY for a further period of five years  with  effect  from  01  January  2024,  with  an  estimated  total  financial  outlay  of  ₹11.80 lakh Crore to be borne by Central Government. The scheme provides a unified institutional mechanism with uniform prices and quantities across the country and removes difficulties for beneficiaries, especially migrants, under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC). Through this system, migrant beneficiaries can claim from any Fair Price Shop (FPS) of their choice, anywhere in the country, based on existing/same ration card in a seamless manner by using either their ration card or Aadhaar number after biometric/ Aadhaar authentication on ePoS device.

9.47  The  procurement  of  foodgrains  at  MSP  and  distribution  of  foodgrains  at  less  than economic cost have financial implications for the government. The economic cost 47  of both wheat and rice witnessed a significant increase during the last few years due to an increase in MSPs and a proportionate increase in the incidentals.  The economic cost of rice and wheat for the year 2023-24( RE) is at ₹ 3931.34 per quintal and ₹ 2709.59 per quintal, respectively 48 .

47 The economic cost of foodgrains consists of three components, namely, pooled cost of grains, procurement incidentals and the cost of distribution.

48 Based on FCI food bulletin data April, 2024

Source: Department of Food and Public Distribution Note:

<!-- image -->

- In addition to net subsidy released to FCI, Repayment of NSSF loan of ₹25,000 Crores in FY 2016-17, ₹ 40,000 Crore in FY 2017- 18, ₹70,000 Crore in FY 2018-19 &amp; ₹44,l64.02 Crore in FY 2019-20 by FCI. ₹3,39,236 Cr for FY 2020-21 released from food subsidy has been adjusted for repayment of NSSF loan. Excludes ₹11,436 crore repaid to FCI from DCP States Head.
- The RE, 2019-20 was ₹33508.35 crore. The subsidy released includes ₹11,436 crore (as part of the NSSF loan), released from FCI to DCP States and returned to FCI in 2020-21.
- During FY 2023-24, ₹336.64 Crores were re-appropriated in favour of NESA Division for Central Assistance.