# Conclusions and Way Forward

CONCLUSIONS AND WAY FORWARD

6.45 The government has placed infrastructure development at the centre stage of its fiscal and public policy agenda. The capital expenditure of the union government for  FY25 has been budgeted at about 3.3 times the capex for FY20. In Q1FY25, the constraints on new approvals and spending during the general elections, coupled with heavy monsoon in many regions, affected the progress of the infrastructure spending. Between July and November 2024, the pace of capex has picked up.

6.46 The review in the chapter shows that the progress of physical indicators in the current year mirrors the financial progress. The addition to the rolling stock of railways, port handling capacity and power and transformation capacity improved during FY25 so far on a Y-o-Y basis. The addition to the length of highways, roads and railway lines has been modestly lower. On the whole, seen against the background of the constraints that  prevailed  in  Q1FY25,  infrastructure  build-up  in  the  current  year  has  stayed  on course.

6.47 Apart from asset creation, our infrastructure programme also emphasises the use of sustainable materials and processes. These considerations are receiving particular attention in areas such as highway development, waterway projects, power capacity addition and waste management. Given the global imperative of promoting sustainable practices, model practices in this direction need to be replicated widely.

6.48 India needs a continued step-up of infrastructure investment over the next two decades to sustain a high rate of growth. Requirements are aplenty. Accelerating our efforts to build integrated multi-modal transport, coupled with the modernisation of existing physical assets, will improve efficiency and last-mile connectivity. Disasterresilient  urbanisation,  public  transport,  preservation  and  upkeep  of  heritage  sites, monuments and tourist destinations, as well as rural public infrastructure, including connectivity, call for greater attention. Our Net Zero commitments entail added stress on creating renewable energy capacities.

6.49 Quite clearly, public sector efforts cannot fully meet these requirements. There are binding budget constraints to the different tiers of government. Private participation should accelerate in many critical infrastructure sectors in many ways-programme and project planning, financing, construction, maintenance, monetisation and impact assessment.

6.50 Our  infrastructure  programme  supports  a  variety  of  PPP  models  like  buildoperate-transfer  (toll  and  annuity),  design-build-finance-operate-transfer,  hybrid annuity  model  and  toll-operate-transfer.  The  government  has  instituted  many  debottlenecking and facilitatory mechanisms like the National Infrastructure Pipeline, National Monetisation Pipeline and PM-Gati Sakti that have made progress. Financial market regulators have introduced reforms to encourage private participation. Yet, the uptake of private enterprise is limited in many core sectors.

6.51 The  strategy  to  step  up  private  participation  needs  coordinated  action  of  all stakeholders involved - governments at different tiers, financial market players, project management experts and planners, and the private sector. Capacities to conceptualise projects,  develop  sector-specific  innovative  strategies  for  execution,  and,  develop high-expertise areas such as risk and revenue sharing, contract management, conflict resolution and project closure need to improve substantially. The efforts of the Union Government would need to be supplemented with wholehearted acceptance of the need for public-private partnerships in infrastructure across the country.