# Improvement in Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure

IMPROVEMENT IN AGRICULTURE MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE

9.32 The government has started several programs to encourage private investment in agricultural marketing infrastructure. One such initiative is the Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) sub-scheme, introduced in 2014. It provides capital subsidies to individuals, farmers, and cooperatives to develop storage infrastructure. The AMI is a capital investment program that is open-ended, demand-driven, credit-linked, and features a back-ended subsidy mechanism.

9.33 Under this sub-scheme, a subsidy of 25 per cent is granted for projects in the plains, while projects in the North-Eastern, hilly, and other specified regions, as well as those led by women, SC/ST promoters, and FPOs, can receive a subsidy of 33.33 per cent. The subsidies support the establishment of a range of agricultural marketing infrastructure  projects,  including  storage  facilities,  rural  haats,  common  facilitation centres for FPOs, market yard infrastructure, direct marketing facilities, mobile postharvest 29 operations, cold storage facilities, and integrated value chain projects up to the primary processing stage.

29    Mobile post-harvest systems are portable solutions for processing, storing, and handling agricultural produce near harvest sites to reduce losses and maintain quality.

9.34 As  of  October  31,  2024,  48611  storage  infrastructure  projects  have  been sanctioned, with ₹4,795.47 crore disbursed in subsidies. In addition, 21004 projects related  to  other  types  of  infrastructure  assisted  under  the  AMI  scheme  have  been sanctioned, amounting to a subsidy of ₹2,125.76 crore.

## BOX IX.5 : Empowering Farmers: The Success Story of MAHAFPC

Maha Farmers Producer Company Limited (MAHAFPC), a state-level producer company in Maharashtra, has empowered 646 FPOs to procure and sell agricultural products, including pulses  and  perishable  items.  It  has  helped  farmers  by  providing  multiple  procurement centres,  reducing  transportation  costs,  and  ensuring  timely  payment  at  MSP.  In  2022, MAHAFPC became Maharashtra's largest procurement channel, benefiting over 1.7 lakh farmers.  The  company  has  also  assisted  FPOs  in  developing  infrastructure  like  storage facilities and processing units. By connecting FPOs with private players and using digital technology,  MAHAFPC  has  created  employment  opportunities  and  strengthened  the agricultural value chain 30 .

9.35 Another scheme is the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) launched in 2020 to  boost  farm-gate  infrastructure  further  and  improve  private  sector  involvement. This  fund  provides  medium-term  debt  financing  for  post-harvest  management  and community farming projects, offering interest subvention and credit guarantees and supporting various projects such as custom hiring centres, processing units, warehouses, and cold storage facilities.

## BOX IX.6 : Innovative Ways of Land Leasing - Case of Kerala

The Model Agricultural Land Leasing Act, 2016, introduced by NITI Aayog, is a model law aimed at legalising and facilitating the leasing of agricultural land in India. The objective is to improve land access for landless and marginal farmers and provide them with various benefits  and  protections  while  safeguarding  the  rights  and  interests  of  landowners.  The states  of  Andhra  Pradesh  and  Odisha  have  attempted  to  introduce  some  forms  of  land leasing. However, the state government of Kerala has created an innovative arrangement for land leasing. Under this, women or men's SHG groups lease land for more than 3 years for horticulture cultivation. This agreement is made under the Indian Contract Act, 1872, in which the lessee offers agriculture as a service to the landlord and shares profits or pays fixed compensation. The Gram Panchayat (GP) becomes a party to the transaction, and the agreement is notarised in the GP. This helps the lessee group become eligible for benefits like credit and insurance. Since the agreement lasts 3 to 5 years, it is well-suited for cultivating horticulture crops. It also encourages the lessee to maintain and nurture the quality of the land, with findings indicating an increase in farm efficiency in terms of input-output ratio in the case of group leased land compared to owned and self-cultivated land and individually leased land in Kerala possibly due to better convergence achieved with central and state government  support  for  group  farming  activities.  The  initiative  has  also  improved  land access for the poor, as more than 85 per cent of the members are under the low-income category.

9.36 To enhance efficiency in agricultural marketing and improve price discovery, the government has introduced the e-NAM Scheme. This initiative provides free software and  financial  assistance  of  ₹75  lakh  per  Agricultural  Produce  Market  Committee (APMC)  Mandi  for  essential  hardware,  which  includes  quality  assaying  equipment and the development of infrastructure for cleaning, grading, sorting, and packaging. Additionally,  to  support  FPOs  and  empower  farmers,  the  government  launched  a scheme in 2020 with a budget of ₹6,860 crore. As of October 31, 2024, over 1.78 crore farmers and 2.62 lakh traders have registered on the e-NAM portal. As of the same date, 9,204 FPOs have been registered, and 4,490 of these organisations have received equity grants amounting to ₹237 crore.

##