# Food Management: Enabling Food Security

FOOD MANAGEMENT: Enabling Food Security

9.53 The basic concept of food security is to ensure that there is access to basic food for their active and healthy lives. It is characterised by the availability, access, utilisation, and stability of food supply. While the government has long tackled household food

security through the Public Distribution System (PDS) and Targeted PDS (TPDS), the National Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013 and the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) marked a fundamental shift in the approach to food security. That is transitioning from a welfare-based to a rights-based approach. NFSA act legally entitles up to 75 per cent of the rural population and up to 50 per cent of the urban population to  receive  foodgrain,  free  of  cost,  under  the  Targeted  Public  Distribution  System, which, as per Census 2011, comes to 81.35 crore persons. Therefore, about two-thirds of the population is covered under the Act to receive highly subsidised food grains. In addition, PMGKAY was introduced to alleviate the suffering of the poor and vulnerable caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The allocation of free food grain under PMGKAY is in addition to the regular allocation for around 80 crore beneficiaries. The provision of free food grains under PMGKAY for another five years, with effect from 1st January 2024, reflects the long-term commitment and vision of the Government for addressing National food and nutrition security.

9.54 To enhance the efficiency of the Public Distribution System (PDS), the government is fully committed to achieving 100 per cent e-KYC compliance nationwide. This aligns with  the  One  Nation,  One  Ration  Card  (ONORC)  scheme,  allowing  beneficiaries  to complete electronic know your customer e-KYC anywhere, regardless of their home state. Beneficiaries can authenticate their Aadhaar biometrics at any Fair Price Shop (FPS), making it especially convenient for migrant workers to access their entitlements. To facilitate post-harvest lending for farmers, especially small and marginal farmers, the government has approved the Credit Guarantee Scheme for electronic-negotiable warehouse receipt (e-NWR)-based Pledge Financing (CGS-NPF). Under this scheme, farmers  can  obtain  loans  against  e-NWRs  issued  for  agricultural  and  horticultural commodities stored in accredited warehouses. The scheme covers the loss incurred by the bank due to credit and warehouseman risk. The scheme will help in increasing postharvest lending against e-NWRs and thereby play a role in improving farmers' income.

## BOX IX.8 : Measures to support foodgrain storage infrastructure in the country

-     To  support and upgrade the storage infrastructure for foodgrains and to ramp up the storage capacity in India, steel silos are being created in PPP.
-     The government is creating capacity under Hub and Spoke Model Silos, where 'Hub' silos have a dedicated railway siding and container depot facility. While the transportation from 'Spoke' Silos to 'Hub' Silos is undertaken by road, transportation from Hub to Hub is via rail.
-     To  improve  food  grain  storage,  especially  in  hilly  and  remote  areas,  the  government is exploring the use of Flospan, a type of Mobile Storage Unit (MSU), in collaboration with the World Food Programme (WFP). These units can be quickly erected and have a storage capacity of 400 metric tonnes. As a pilot project, WFP has installed Flospan in six states: Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Mizoram, Uttarakhand, and Chhattisgarh.
-     To modernise government grain warehouses, the government partnered with WFP and IGMRI to pilot a 'Smart Warehouse'. This warehouse uses sensors to monitor temperature, humidity, airflow, and rodent activity, providing real-time data to improve storage and reduce losses.

##