# Demand Stimulus to Industrial Growth

demand stimulus to industrial growth. Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) as a share of GDP in H1 of FY23 was the highest among all half years, H1 or H2, since FY15. Further, the strong export performance of FY22 continued somewhat in the first half of FY23. In this half of the year, exports of goods and services as a share of GDP have been the highest since FY16. However, the performance began to wane in the first half itself as the Year-on-Year (YoY) growth of exports declined from Q1 to Q2 due to persistently high inflation and rising interest rates in the advanced economies. The increase in investment demand has emerged as another powerful stimulus to industrial growth. It has been triggered by the augmented capex of the central government in the current and the previous year as compared to the pre-pandemic years. The leap also has crowded in private investment, already upbeat on the pent-up demand, export stimulus, and strengthening of the corporate balance sheets.

The supply response of the industry to the demand stimulus has been robust, as seen in high-frequency indicators. PMI manufacturing has remained in the expansion zone for 18 months since July 2021, and its sub-indices indicate an easing of input cost pressures, improving supplier delivery times, robust export orders, and future output. While growth in  the  consumer durables component of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is on account of the release of 'pent-up' demand, the increase in capital goods and infrastructure/ construction goods is indicative of the beginnings of a virtuous investment cycle that is expected to be led by the private sector. The growth of the eight core industries of coal, fertilisers, cement, electricity, steel, and refinery products has held steady, reflecting a broad momentum in industrial activity. However, the manufacturing landscape further shows uneven growth across various categories, with industries such as automobiles and

electronics registering impressive performances while sectors such as textiles have been showing tepid growth, as export demand for these products has been mellowing with the slowing of global output and demand.

Industrial activity has been supported by an upswing in bank credit to the sector. Credit to industry started recovering from the beginning of the year and has been growing in double digits since July 2022. Credit to MSMEs has also seen a significant increase in part,  assisted  by  the