# Industry Groups and their Challenges

Industry Groups and their challenges

## Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) post smart recovery from pandemic

9.17 While the contribution of the MSME sector to overall GVA rose from 29.3 per cent in FY18 to 30.5 per cent in FY20, the economic impact of the pandemic caused the sector's share to fall to 26.8 per cent in FY21. MSME contribution to the manufacturing sector's GVA also marginally fell to 36.0 per cent in FY21.

## MSMe Performance

Figure IX.9a: MSMe share in exports

Figure IX.9b: MSMe Share in overall Gva and Manufacturing Gva

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Source: MoSPI, Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&amp;S

Note: *Data for FY23 is until Aug 2022

- 9.18 Through the AatmaNirbhar Bharat Package, the government has taken multiple steps to cushion the economic impact of the pandemic on MSMEs. Some of the measures undertaken include the modification of the definition of MSMEs; the provision of ₹20,000 crore subordinate debt for stressed MSMEs, ₹50,000 crore equity infusion through Self Reliant India fund; the waiving of the global tender requirement for procurement of up to ₹200 crore; launching of the Udyam portal for MSME registration, a paperless, zero-cost registration portal that is based on self-declaration and only requires Aadhaar. Registrations on the Udyam portal crossed the onecrore mark in August 2022, surpassing the total registration done in the past 14 years under the old regime in just 2.5 years.  As of 7 th January 2022, the portal has a total registration count of 1.32 crore, of which 1.27 crore have been classified as micro-enterprises. Enterprises registered on the portal employ 9.6 crore people, of which 2.3 crore are women. There are 1.5 lakh exporting units, which have contributed a cumulative ₹9.7 lakh crore worth of exports.
- 9.19 The government's initiative of the Samadhaan Portal, set up under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act to monitor the outstanding dues to the MSME sector, is helping MSMEs in resolving their cashflow difficulties. As of 7 th January 2022, the portal has received a total of 1.3 lakh applications, of which 16.8 per cent have been disposed while 25.0 per cent are currently under consideration, and 25.1 per cent have been rejected. In order to fast-track this process, the government has instructed Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and all companies with a turnover of ₹200 crore or more to get themselves onboarded on the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) platform for facilitating the discounting of trade receivables of MSMEs through multiple financiers. CHAMPIONS, the single-window grievance redressal portal for MSMEs launched by the Ministry of MSME in June 2020, has received  56,825  grievances  as  of  16 th January  2023,  of  which  55,878  grievances  have  been responded to. The portal continues to be improved through initiatives such as the localisation of the portal in 11 regional languages and the introduction of a Chatbot.
- 9.20 The government has also initiated the 'Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance' scheme (RAMP) in FY23. The World Bank-supported scheme aims at strengthening institutions and governance at the Centre and State, improving Centre-State linkages and partnerships and improving access of MSMEs to market and credit, technology upgradation and addressing issues of delayed payments and greening of MSMEs. The RAMP programme will be implemented over a period of five years. The total outlay for the scheme is ₹6,062.4 crore, out of which ₹3750 crore would be a loan from the World Bank, and the Government of India would fund the remaining ₹2312.4 crore.
- 9.21 The bouquet of measures introduced by the government aided the resilience of the MSME sector. Data from the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Corporation (NCGTC) shows that as of 30 th November 2022, 1.2 crore MSME units availed the ECLGS scheme and raised collateralfree resources to the tune of ₹3.6 lakh crore. A recent CIBIL report 2 showed that 83 per cent of the borrowers who availed of the ECLGS were micro-enterprises, and more than half of these borrowers had an exposure of less than ₹10 lakh. The NPA rate in banks for the category of MSME borrowers who availed of ECLGS was lower than the category that did not avail of the scheme. The recovery of the MSME sector from the pandemic-induced shock is evident in the

2 https://www.transunioncibil.com/resources/tucibil/doc/insights/reports/eclgs-insights-report.pdf

trend in GST paid by MSME units. The GST paid by the sector in FY22 has crossed the prepandemic level in FY20.

Figure IX.10: GST paid by MSMes in FY22 crossed the pre-pandemic level

Figure IX.11: ecLGS aided MSMes in improving their asset quality

<!-- image -->

Source: Ministry of Finance

Note: Includes firms with turnover up to ₹1000 crore. Micro -- &lt;= 25cr; Small &lt;= 25 to 100 Cr.; Medium 100 to 1000 Cr.

<!-- image -->

Source: ECLGS Insights Report', TransUnion CIBIL, August 2022

## Electronics industry to be a key driver of manufacturing output and exports.

9.22 The electronics industry continues to ascend in importance as its applications become pervasive, particularly in the socio-economic development of a country. Electronics, supported by continuously improving communication services, will significantly enhance productivity, efficient service delivery, and social transformation. The domestic electronics industry, as of FY20, is valued at US$118 billion. India aims to reach US$300 billion worth of electronics manufacturing and US$ 120 billion in exports by FY26 3 , supported by the vision of a US$ 1 trillion digital economy by 2025. Improvement in manufacturing and export over the past five years ensures that India is on the right trajectory to achieve this target. Electronic goods were among the top five commodity groups exhibiting positive export growth in November 2022, with the exports in this segment growing YoY by 55.1 per cent.

- 9.23 The major drivers of growth in this industry are mobile phones, consumer electronics, and industrial electronics. In the mobile phone segment, India has become the second-largest mobile phone manufacturer globally, with the production of handsets going up from six crore units in FY15 to 31 crore units in FY22. These numbers are expected to improve as more domestic and global players set up and expand their bases in India. Two major global and domestic players in electronic manufacturing services have already embraced the PLI scheme 4 . Participation in the

3 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1792189

4 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1885189

PLI scheme will help many more domestic players to attain economies of scale in production through localising. Hence, this will further enhance export competitiveness and increase India's participation in the global value chain. The industrial electronics sector is also seeing growth due to improved digitisation and robotics applications in Industry 4.0. Additionally, the impetus on  Smart  Cities  and  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  will  streamline  the  demand  for  smart  and automated electronics.

Figure IX.12: Robust growth in electronics exports

<!-- image -->

Source: DGCI&amp;S

9.24 Some  of  the  initiatives  and  incentives  provided  by  the  government  to  nurture  and enhance the electronics manufacturing base include the PLI scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing, the PLI scheme for IT hardware, the Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components and Semiconductors (SPECS). Additionally, under the Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India, the Cabinet approved the comprehensive development of a sustainable semiconductor and display ecosystem in the country with an outlay of ₹76,000 crore, the details of which are in Box 3. These schemes and initiatives are expected to boost India's manufacturing capacity, reduce import dependence, and also contribute to achieving the country's ambitions of becoming a major player in global supply chains.

## Box IX.3: Incentives to encourage semiconductor manufacturing in the US and India

The  global  economic  recovery  from  the  Covid-19  pandemic  exposed  the  frailties  in  the  supply chains of many goods and services. One product that was under the spotlight was the semiconductor (more commonly referred to as 'chips'), and the effect of its shortage was particularly amplified in the automotive industry globally. While the situation has limped back to normalcy, it has prompted a policy response by countries towards diversifying the semiconductor supply chain.

One  of  the  most  notable  policies  is  the  United  States'  Creating  Helpful  Incentives  to  Produce Semiconductors and Science Act, 2022 (CHIPS and Science Act, 2022). The legislation aims to catalyse investments in the domestic semiconductor manufacturing capacity of the US. The country produces about 10 per cent of the world's semiconductors and relies heavily on East Asia to import chips. The CHIPS and Science Act directs US$ 280 billion in spending over the next ten years, with the bulk of it going to Research and Development (R&amp;D).

Figure a: Incentives under the cHIPS and Science act, 2022

<!-- image -->

Source: whitehouse.gov.in; McKinsey and Co.

In  the  pursuit  of Aatmanirbharta  and  with  the  objective  of  plugging  itself  into  the  global  value chain, India has announced multiple incentives to attract investment for developing a semiconductor manufacturing  ecosystem.  To  this  end,  a  comprehensive  programme  with  an  outlay  of  ₹76,000 crore (approx. US$ 10 billion) was approved by the Government of India in September 2022. The government will provide financial support for 50 per cent of the capital expenditure to be incurred by the investing firms.

Table a: various incentives under Semiconductor Scheme

| Scheme for                                                                                                     | Financial Support           | R&DSupport                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Setting up of Semiconductor Fabs in India                                                                      | 50 per cent of firm's Capex | Up to 2.5 per cent of the scheme outlay |
| Setting up Display Fabs                                                                                        | 50 per cent of firm's Capex | Up to 2.5 per cent of the scheme outlay |
| Setting up of Compound Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics / Sensors Fab and Semiconductor ATMP/OSAT facilities | 50 per cent of firm's Capex | Up to 2.5 per cent of the scheme outlay |

Source: MEITY

Note: ATMP stands for assembly, testing, marking, and packaging. OSAT stands for Outsourced Semiconductor Assembly and Test

Recognising  that  even  though  India  possesses  20  per  cent  of  the  world's  semiconductor  design engineers but a minuscule share in the intellectual property (IP), the Government of India has also announced a Design Linked-Incentive (DLI) scheme. The scheme's objectives include the nurturing and facilitation of domestic companies of semiconductor design, achieving significant indigenisation of semiconductor products and IPs deployed across the country, and strengthening the infrastructure for  design. The  scheme  will  provide  financial  support  of  50  per  cent  of  eligible  expenditure  on the  design,  subject  to  a  ceiling  of  ₹15  crore  per  applicant  and  a  deployment-linked  incentive  of 4  per  cent  to  6  per  cent  of  net  sales  achieved  over  five  years,  subject  to  a  ceiling  of  ₹30  crore per applicant.

While these are early stages, global and domestic players have evinced interest based on the prospects for the semiconductor industry in India and the fiscal incentives provided. Israel-based International Semiconductor Consortium has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to invest ₹ 22,900 crore in Karnataka to set up India's first chip-making plant. Domestic players such as Vedanta and Tata have also indicated plans to establish semiconductor fabs in the country.

## CoaI Industry: Key in maintaining energy self-reliance during uncertain times

9.25 At the beginning of the fiscal year, coal availability became a challenge for India's largely thermal-based power generation plants because of a resurgence in economic activity and the emergence of intense heat waves from early March to mid-May of 2022, increasing the demand for power in the country. In addition, in the wake of rising international coal prices, the power sector curtailed coal import drastically from 69 MT in FY20 to 45 MT in FY21 and further to 27 MT in FY22. As domestic coal production could not keep pace with its rising demand from power-generating plants, its availability got limited. Resultantly, in April 2022, even as coal offtake rose to meet higher demand, coal stock with power plants, as on 31st April 2022, fell to 8 days from 12 days a year ago.

9.26 The government of India undertook several steps on a priority basis through April and May of 2022 to address the supply constraints of coal. First, all generators were asked to import coal to the extent of 10 per cent of their requirements (as against 4 per cent earlier). Penalties, including curtailment of domestic coal entitlements, were announced if power plants failed to import coal. Second, Section 11 of the Electricity Act 2003 (Act) was invoked to direct imported coal-based plants to run at full capacity with the assurance that their enhanced cost of operation would be compensated. Third, tolling was enabled, which allowed states to transfer their allotted coal  to  private  generators  near  the  mines  instead  of  transporting  it  too  far  away  from  state generators.  This  move  eased  the  burden  on  the  availability  of  railway  rakes.  Fourth,  Rural Electrification Corporation (REC)/ Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and commercial banks were advised to facilitate  the  availability  of  additional  working  capital  to  power  generating plants.

Figure IX.13: adequate coal Production

<!-- image -->

Figure IX.14: Improving coal Stock

<!-- image -->

Source: Ministry of Coal

Note: Production by Coal India Limited (CIL), Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) and Captives/Others

Source: National Power Portal

- 9.27 Well-timed measures have placed India in a better position to cater to excess energy demand. The coal production for FY23 is estimated to increase to 911 million tonnes, about 17 per cent higher compared to the previous year. In April-December, 2022, coal production rose by 14 per cent on a YoY basis and was 21 per cent higher than the pre-pandemic of FY20. Further, the coal stock at power plants improved to 12 days as of 30 December 2022 compared to 10 days on 30 June 2022 and 8 days a year ago.
- 9.28 Different measures have been initiated towards achieving self-reliance in coal production, including private participation in coal production, FDI under the automatic route, auctioning of coal blocks for commercial production, expansion of existing mines and opening of new mines, greater use of mass production technology in mining, mechanisation of loading, development of evacuation infrastructure etc.
- 9.29 The coal industry is expected to grow at 6-7 per cent annually to reach a production level of 1 billion tonnes by FY26 and about 1.5 billion tonnes by 2030. The enhanced domestic coal production is expected to meet domestic coal demand, replace substitutable imports, and escalate exports. There has also been a persistent effort to improve system capacity utilisation from about 80 per cent to above 90 per cent.

## Re-invigorated infrastructure sector &amp; construction activity to drive steel industry.

- 9.30 Steel Sector plays a pivotal role in crucial sectors such as construction, infrastructure, automobile, engineering and defence. Over the years, the steel sector has witnessed tremendous growth. The country is now a global force in steel production and the 2 nd largest crude steel producer in the world. The steel sector's performance in the current fiscal year has been robust, with cumulative production and consumption of finished steel at 88 MT and 86 MT, respectively, during April-December 2022, higher than the corresponding period during the previous four

years. The growth in finished steel production is aided by double-digit growth in consumption (11 per cent on a YoY basis), bolstered by a pick-up in the infrastructure sector significantly driven by increased Capex of the government.

9.31 Further, 67 applications from 30 companies have been selected under the PLI Scheme for speciality steel. This will attract a committed investment of ₹42,500 crore, with an increase in capacity by almost 26 million tons and an employment generation potential of nearly 70,000 people. Further, domestic steel makers' stable credit profiles, deleveraged balance sheets, and robust cash accrual support continue to support their capex. Iron and steel exports moderated in  the  first  eight  months  of  the  current  fiscal  owing  to  a  slowdown  in  the  global  economy, particularly in Europe and China, and export duty levied to enhance domestic availability. Yet, iron and steel exports are higher by 20 per cent over the corresponding pre-pandemic levels of FY20.

Figure IX.15: Increasing Steel Production and consumption (apr-Dec)

Figure IX.16: a slight moderation in Iron and Steel exports during FY23

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Source: Joint Plant Committee (JPC), Ministry of Steel Source: DGCI&amp;S

9.32 In  the  future,  the  government's  thrust  towards  infrastructure  projects,  pick-up  in construction and real estate activity, and healthy demand from the automobile sector augur well for the demand for steel products. However, export demand may remain subdued with the global slowdown.

## Government support to help textile Industry weather current challenges.

9.33 The Textile industry  is  one  of  the  country's  most  significant  sources  of  employment generation, with an estimated 4.5 crore people directly engaged in this sector, including a large number of women and the rural population. In the current financial year, the textile industry has been facing the challenge of moderating exports compared to FY22. However, the levels in the eight six months still prevail, 9.5 per cent higher than the corresponding pre-pandemic level of FY20. Export of readymade garments registered a growth of 3.2 per cent YoY basis during the same period. FDI inflows into the textile sector are yet to recover to pre-pandemic levels.

Figure IX.17: export of Textiles moderated, while there is an uptick in Readymade Garment exports (april-Nov)

<!-- image -->

Figure IX.18: FDI equity inflows in Textile yet to Recover

<!-- image -->

Source: Dept. of Commerce

Source: DPIIT

9.34 To develop integrated large-scale and modern industrial infrastructure facilities for the entire  value  chain  of  the  textile  industry,  the  government  approved  the  setting  up  of  seven PM Mega  Integrated  Textile  Region  and Apparel  (PM  MITRA)  Parks.  The  parks  will  not only reduce logistics costs and improve the competitiveness of Indian Textiles but also boost employment generation, attract domestic investment and FDI, and position India firmly in the global textile market. The parks are expected to create a total of one lakh direct and two lakh indirect employment.

9.35 Further,  to  boost  the  production  capacity,  the  government  launched  the  Textile  PLI Scheme with an approved outlay of ₹10,683 crore over five years starting from 1st January 2022 to promote investments and increase the production of Man-Made Fibre (MMF) Apparel, MMF Fabrics and Products of Technical Textiles. This will enable the textile sector to achieve size and scale, enhancing export competitiveness. In the approved 64 applications so far, the proposed total  investment  commitment  is  ₹19,798  crore,  with  projected  turnover  and  employment generation of ₹1.9 lakh crore and 2.5 lakh, respectively.

## Growth momentum in pharmaceuticals industry sustains after the pandemic

9.36 The Indian Pharmaceuticals industry plays a prominent role in the global pharmaceuticals industry. India's domestic pharmaceutical market is estimated at US$ 41 billion in 2021 and is likely to grow to US$ 65 billion by 2024 and is further expected to reach US$ 130 billion by 2030 5 . India is ranked 3rd worldwide in the production of pharma products by volume and 14th by value. The nation is the largest provider of generic medicines globally, occupying a 20 per cent share in global supply by volume, and is the leading vaccine manufacturer globally with a market share of 60 per cent.

5 https://pib.gov.in/Pressreleaseshare.aspx?PRID=1660739

Figure IX.19: Strong growth in pharmaceutical exports

<!-- image -->

Figure IX.20: High inflow of FDI in the Pharma Sector

<!-- image -->

Source: DGCI&amp;S

Source: DPIIT

9.37 Indian pharmaceutical exports achieved a healthy growth of 24 per cent in FY21, driven by Covid-19-induced demand for critical drugs and other supplies made to over 150 countries. The performance of pharma exports in FY22 has been robust, sustaining growth despite the global trade disruptions and drop in demand for Covid-19-related treatments. Carrying forward this growth momentum, drug and pharmaceutical exports during April-October 2022 was 22 per cent higher than the corresponding pre-pandemic period of FY20. Cumulative FDI in the pharma sector crossed the US$ 20 billion mark in September 2022. Further, FDI inflows have increased four-fold over five years until September 2022, to US$ 699 million, supported by investor-friendly policies and a positive outlook for the industry.

Figure IX.21: Three PLI Schemes to boost Manufacturing capacity in the Pharmaceutical Sector Medical Devices

Critical KSMs/DIs/APIs

Pharmaceuticals

## Critical KSMs/DIs/APIs

## Medical Devices

## Pharmaceuticals

- /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-*&amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 62
- /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-* &amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 4F
- /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c- 0 A0Y82-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;
- /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;$'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! &amp;%GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-93-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)- !)--3209YF-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;()&amp;%)1 !%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;0 8036F18GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;$'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! &amp;%-
- /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-* &amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 4Y
- /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c- 0 60842-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;
- /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c-0390222-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;

&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;) -3F0AA

- /FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-pGLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-93-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- -!* -GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;$$!**GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;0 8036F18GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-*&amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 62 /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c- 0 A0Y82-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; /FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-pGLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-93-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- -!* -GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;$$!**GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-
- /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;$'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! &amp;%GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (&amp;$-43-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;+%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-A0833-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;()&amp;%)1 GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;$$!**GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;) -3029F1YD-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;$'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! &amp;%-
- /FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-pGLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-43-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;--!* GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;$$!**GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;) -3029F1YD-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-* &amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 4F /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c- 0 60842-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; /FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-pGLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-43-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;--!* -
- !%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;/FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; +%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-99-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;--!* -GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*+GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; #!%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /cGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 43-* &amp;-GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 4Y /DGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e c-0390222-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; /FGLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* !#-GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; +%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 42440-99-GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''#!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;''(&amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;--!* -GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*+GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; #-
- /6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; pGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=20,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; e/6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; pGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;   GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! %GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ! GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; &amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-9-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* -&amp;%!%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $ GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # $GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # .GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; () 1 GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-93-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)- !)--3209YF-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;()&amp;%)1 /6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; pGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=20,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (&amp;$-43-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;+%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-A0833-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;()&amp;%)1 /6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;   GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! %GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ! GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; &amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-9-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* -&amp;%!%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $ GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # $GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # -

.GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; () 1

- !%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* ! ,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*-* GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) -&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ,!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) - GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;(-9/6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 8GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c--&amp;%!%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $ GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # )GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) -+ ,GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (!&amp;+)-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;(! GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) ,GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (.!%GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; - &amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-* .GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; () -(GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! %GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-32 'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* *&amp;-6-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* pGLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; !%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* ! ,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*-* GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) -&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ,!GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) - GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;(-9420222-GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-F20222!%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * "&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)1 /6GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; eGLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; 8GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; p GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c--&amp;%!%GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $ GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # )GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; # GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) -+ ,GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (!&amp;+)-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;&amp;(! GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; ) ,GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (.!%GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; - &amp;,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-*
- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-99-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)- c- 420222-GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-F20222!%GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * "&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)1 !%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;!%,GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;)*$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*&amp;GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;-GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;) -3F0AA GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;(GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;1 /4GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=26,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=23,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=18,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; c-r)*!$GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=28,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; $'#&amp;.$GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%*- GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;%GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; * ! GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-99-'(&amp;"GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;*)- c- -

.GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; () -(GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;! %GLYPH&lt;c=31,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;- GLYPH&lt;c=30,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(&amp;$-32

Source: Department of Pharmaceuticals

'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; (-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %* -

*&amp;-6-'GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt;(-GLYPH&lt;c=27,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; GLYPH&lt;c=29,font=/ANAAAT+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; %*

9.38 The government has undertaken various measures to improve the infrastructural facilities of the pharma sector. The concerned scheme, Strengthening the Pharmaceutical Industry (SPI), was launched on 11th March 2022 with a total financial outlay of ₹500 crore for five years from FY22 to FY26 with multiple objectives. First, it aims to strengthen the existing infrastructure facilities  by  providing  financial  assistance  to  pharma  clusters  to  create  common  facilities. Second,  it  upgrades  the  production  facilities  of  MSMEs  to  meet  national  and  international regulatory standards by providing interest subvention or capital subsidy on their capital loans. Third, it also promotes knowledge and awareness about the pharmaceutical and medical devices industry by undertaking studies, building databases and bringing industry leaders, academia and policymakers together to share their knowledge and experience.

## India becomes the world's 3 rd  largest automobile market

9.39 The automobile sector is a key driver of India's economic growth. In December 2022, India became the 3 rd largest automobile market, surpassing Japan and Germany in terms of sales. In 2021, India was the largest manufacturer of two-wheeler and three-wheeler vehicles and the world's fourth-largest manufacturer of passenger cars. The sector's importance is gauged by the fact that it contributes 7.1 per cent to the overall GDP and 49 per cent to the manufacturing GDP while generating direct and indirect employment of 3.7 crore at the end of 2021.

Figure IX.22: Rising automobile Sales

Figure IX.23: Moderation in automobile exports amid weakening global demand

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Source: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM)

9.40 The automotive industry is expected to play a critical role in the transition towards green energy. The domestic electric vehicles (EV) market is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 49 per cent between 2022 and 2030 and is expected to hit one crore units annual sales by 2030. The EV industry will create 5 crore direct and indirect jobs by 2030 6 . To support and nurture this development, the government has undertaken multiple steps.

6 https://www.investindia.gov.in/team-india-blogs/electric-vehicle-ev-sector-india-boost-both-economy-and-environment

Figure IX.24: Rising Sales of auto components

<!-- image -->

Source: Ministry of Heavy Industries

Note: OEM stands for Original Equipment Manufacture

Aftermarket means the market for spare parts, accessories, and components for motor vehicles.

Figure IX.25: consumption enhancing Incentive Schemes

<!-- image -->

Source: Ministry of Heavy Industries

Note: FAME stands for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles

Figure IX.26: Production Linked Incentive Schemes

<!-- image -->

Source: Ministry of Heavy Industries

9.41 Despite the upbeat  outlook,  the  automotive  industry  faces  certain  challenges.  Higher borrowing costs and tempering global demand are expected to be near-term hurdles.  Amongst structural issues, the increase in long-term third-party vehicle insurance premiums has increased the total upfront insurance cost by about 10-11 per cent, especially for two-wheelers. Therefore, the two-wheeler segment is the most affected and witnessed the lowest sales in the last ten years. Addressing these challenges will boost the automobile industry.

## India's Prospects as a Key Player in the Global value chain

9.42 The risk of supply chain shocks has never been more palpable than today, following compounding crises from the US-China trade war, the Covid-19 pandemic, and the war in Ukraine. In this fast-evolving context, as global companies adapt their manufacturing and supply chain strategies to build resilience, India has a unique opportunity to become a global manufacturing hub  this  decade.  The  three  primary  assets  to  capitalise  on  this  unique  opportunity  are  the potential for significant domestic demand, the Government's drive to encourage manufacturing, and a distinct demographic edge, including a considerable proportion of the young workforce. The manufacturing sector in India is gradually shifting to more automated and process-driven manufacturing, which is expected to increase efficiency and boost the production of the industry. The 'Make-in-India' Initiative was launched in 2014 to make India a hub for manufacturing, design, and innovation. Since then, it has facilitated investment, fostered innovation and built world-class  infrastructure.  The  progress  made  in  infrastructure  development  is  discussed  in chapter 12 " Physical and Digital Infrasturcture: lifting potential growth ".

## Make in India 2.0 and the PLI schemes

9.43 To further enhance India's integration in the global value chain, 'Make in India 2.0' is now

focusing on 27 sectors, which include 15 manufacturing sectors and 12 service sectors. Amongst these, 24 sub-sectors have been chosen while keeping in mind the Indian industries' strengths and competitive edge, the need for import substitution, the  potential  for  export  and  increased  employability. Efforts are on to boost the growth of the sub-sectors in a holistic and coordinated manner.

Figure IX.27: 24 Sub-Sectors under Make in India 2.0

<!-- image -->

Source: DPIIT

9.44 In pursuit of the objectives of the Make-in-India programme and with a vision to achieve Aatmanirbharta, the government launched the PLI scheme. The scheme is expected to attract a capex of approximately ₹3 lakh crore over the next five years. It has the potential to generate employment for over 60 lakh in India and increase the share of the manufacturing sector in total capital formation, which currently stands at around 17-20 per cent between FY12 and FY20. It is further believed that there will be a significant reduction in the trade deficit with domestic production substituting for imports. Sectors under which the PLI scheme has been announced currently constitute around 40 per cent of the total imports. The scheme, spread across 14 sectors, can enhance India's annual manufacturing capex by 15 to 20 per cent from FY23.

9.45 PLI Scheme across these key specific sectors is poised to make Indian manufacturers globally  competitive,  attract  investment  in  the  areas  of  core  competency  and  cutting-edge technology; ensure efficiencies; create economies of scale; and make India an integral part of the global value chain. The scheme will benefit the MSME ecosystem in the country. The anchor units built in every sector will require a new supplier base in the entire value chain. Most of these ancillary units will be built in the MSME sector.

9.46 As  of  31 st December  2022,  717  applications  have  been  approved  under  14  Schemes. More than 100 MSMEs are among the PLI beneficiaries in sectors such as Bulk Drugs, Medical Devices, Telecom, White Goods and Food Processing. As per recent reporting from implementing Ministries/  Departments,  around  ₹47,500  crore  (US$  6  billion)  of  actual  investment  has  been made; production/ sales of ₹3.85 lakh crore (US$ 47 billion) of eligible products and employment

generation of around 3 lakh has been reported and 106 per cent achievement of actual investment reported  versus  the  corresponding  projections  of  FY22 7 .  Key  sectors  such  as  Large-Scale Electronics Manufacturing, Pharmaceuticals, Telecom &amp; Networking Products, Food Processing and White Goods have contributed considerably to investment, production, sales and employment.

9.47 Some of the latest developments under the PLI programme include the launch of a designled PLI in June 2022 to promote the entire value chain in telecom manufacturing and to build a strong ecosystem for 5G as part of the PLI Scheme for Telecom &amp; Networking products. Approvals under this Scheme have already been granted to eligible companies. In September 2022, the Cabinet recently approved PLI Scheme (Tranche II) on 'National Programme on High-Efficiency Solar PV Modules', with an outlay of ₹19,500 crore to build an ecosystem for manufacturing of high-efficiency solar PV modules in India, thus reducing import dependence in the area of renewable energy.

## Box IX.4: Shipbuilding Sector: achieving Self-Reliance and promoting Make in India

The Shipbuilding industry is a strategically important industry due to its role in energy security, national defence and the development of the heavy engineering industry. It has the potential to increase the contribution of the industry and the services sector to the national GDP. With its immense direct and indirect linkages with most other leading industries, such as steel, aluminum, electrical machinery and equipment etc., and its huge dependence on infrastructure and services sectors of the economy, the shipbuilding  industry  has  the  potential  to  strengthen  the  mission  of  an  'Aatmanirbhar'  Bharat. The Indian Navy (IN) shipbuilding projects currently in progress at various Indian shipyards are poised to provide the requisite impetus to the industry. With the objective to achieve strategic independence in shipbuilding and development of niche technology, as of date, more than 130 IN warships have been constructed at Indian shipyards, and presently, 41 of 43 ships and submarines are being constructed at various public and private sector Indian shipyards. These initiatives, through various channels, are contributing to economic growth and employment in the country.

## Boost to ancillary Industry

Shipbuilding  with  its  links  to  other  ancillary  industries,  including  steel,  engineering  equipment, port infrastructure, trade and shipping services has the potential to create a collaborative production eco-system. With the development of these ancillary industries, the sector generates opportunities for  smaller  businesses  and  strengthens  supply  chain  networks.  It  is  noteworthy  that  a  significant proportion of value addition, approximately 65 per cent, in the construction of a ship is derived from manufacturers of shipboard materials, equipment, and systems.

## Significant Investment and employment Generation Multiplier effects

Based on International shipbuilding statistics, if one takes a conservative Marginal Consumption to GDP Ratio (MCGR) of 0.45 for the shipbuilding sector, the investment multiplier would be approx. around 1.82. For example, an injection of approx. ₹1.5 lakh crore in naval shipbuilding projects would accrue a circulation of ₹2.73 lakh crore in the shipbuilding sector due to the multiplier effect.

Among  manufacturing  activities,  shipbuilding  has  one  of  the  highest  employment  multipliers of  6.4 8 .  It  is  capable  of  generating  mass  employment  in  remote,  coastal  and  rural  areas,  thereby

7 https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetailm.aspx?PRID=1884181

8 https://pib.gov.in/Pressreleaseshare.aspx?PRID=1593424

absorbing the labour migrating from agricultural pursuits to manufacturing facilities  established  by shipyards  and  their  ancillary  industries.  The  Indigenisation  initiatives  implemented  by  the  IN  have resulted in a significant infusion of economic activity by creating employment opportunities for MSMEs and other industries. For instance, the recently commissioned INS Vikrant alone engaged approximately 500 MSMEs, 12,000 employees from ancillary industries, and 2,000 shipyard employees.

Further, a study undertaken by the IN for the construction of seven P17A ships reveals that around three-fourths of the total project cost of warships is invested back into the Indian economy. This investment  is  ploughed  back  into  the  economy  through  indigenous  sourcing  of  raw  materials, development of equipment and systems installed onboard ships and other manpower services.

Besides  benefiting  the  ancillary  industries  and  creating  massive  employment  opportunities,  an indigenous shipping and shipbuilding industry can also reduce freight bills and forex outgo, thereby reducing the current account deficit.

Thus,  we  see  that  the  strong  forward  and  backward  linkages  of  the  shipbuilding  sector  play  an important part in the creation of a self-relient India.

## Fostering Innovation

9.48 The government's efforts towards fostering innovation include incubation, handholding, funding, industry-academia partnership and mentorship. The government has also strengthened its  IPR  regime  by  modernising  the  IP  office,  reducing  legal  compliances  and  facilitating  IP filing for start-ups, women entrepreneurs, small industries and others. This has resulted in a 46 per cent growth in the domestic filing of patents over 2016-2021, signalling India's transition towards a knowledge-based economy.

9.49 These measures have begun to pay dividends. The Global Innovation Index (GII) ranks the  countries  based  on  innovation  performance,  comprising  around  80  indicators,  including measures on the political environment, education, infrastructure and knowledge creation of each economy. As per the GII 2022 report, India entered the top 40 innovating countries for the first time in 2022 since the inception of the GII in 2007 by improving its rank from 81 in 2015 to 40 in 2022. Further, India became the most innovative nation in the lower middle-income group overtaking Vietnam (48 th ) and leading the Central and Southern Asia region.

## Box XI.5: 'Flipping and Reverse Flipping: the recent developments in Start-ups'

India ranks amongst the largest startup ecosystems in the world. An impressive 9 lakh+ direct jobs have been created by the DPIIT recognised startups (self-reported), with a notable 64 per cent increase in 2022 over the average number of new jobs created in the last three years. About 48 per cent of our startups are from Tier II &amp; III cities, a testimony of our grassroots' tremendous potential.

Various targeted initiatives of the Government have given a major boost to start-ups. For instance, under the Start-up India Initiative , eligible companies get recognised as Start-ups by DPIIT to access a host of tax benefits, easier compliance, and IPR (Intellectual Property Rights) fast-tracking. As part of the umbrella schemes of the National Initiative for Developing and Harnessing Innovations (NIDHI) and atal Innovation Mission (aIM) , entrepreneurship and innovation are fostered across the start-up ecosystem in the country. The Fund of Funds for Start-ups (FFS) and Credit Guarantee

Scheme  for  Start-ups  (CGSS)  support  seed  funding  and  successive  credit  needs.  The  R&amp;D platform  for  technology  sectors  is  offered  by  schemes  such  as  MeitY  Start-up  Hub  (MSH)  and Technology  Incubation  and  Development  of  entrepreneurs  (TIDe  2.0) , among  others. Engaging  Indian  start-ups  with  global  peers  is  another  essential  pillar  of  Start-up  India  and  is facilitated through Government-to-Government partnerships, participation in international forums, and hosting of global events. Further, the Support for International Patent Protection in e&amp;IT (SIP-eIT) Scheme  encourages  international  patent  filing  by  Indian  MSMEs  and  start-ups 9 .

Figure a: Jobs created by Start-ups

<!-- image -->

Note: Data as on 17 th  January 2023

While  external  support  from  the  government  has  made  it  relatively  easier  than  before  for entrepreneurship to thrive, there are several inherent challenges faced by start-ups. Be it ever-elusive funding, revenue generation struggles, lack of easy access to supportive infrastructure, or wading through the regulatory environment and tax structures. It has also been observed that many Indian companies have been getting headquartered overseas, especially in destinations with favourable legal environments and taxation policies. The technical jargon for this may be identified as ' Flipping' , which is the process of transferring the entire ownership of an Indian company to an overseas entity, accompanied by a transfer of all IP and all data hitherto owned by the Indian company. It effectively transforms an Indian company into a 100 per cent subsidiary of a foreign entity, with the founders and investors retaining the same ownership via the foreign entity, having swapped all shares.

Typically, 'Flipping' happens at the early stage of the Start-ups, driven by commercial, taxation and personal preferences of founders and investors. Some companies decide to 'Flip' because the major market of their product is offshore. Sometimes, investor preferences like access to incubators drive the companies to 'Flip' as they insist on a particular domicile. Some companies prefer to domicile in countries where they would like to access Capital Market later for better valuations and ticket size. Better protection and enforcement of IP and tax treatment of Licensing revenue from IP, residential status of Founders, and agile corporate structures have been the reasons for 'Flipping' in the Past.

In popular holding company jurisdictions like Singapore ,  dividends received from a Singaporean company/subsidiary  are  not  taxed  at  the  holding  level.  There  are  no  withholding  taxes  when

9 Source: PIB https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1884256, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx -

?PRID=1884069#:~:text=PLI%20Scheme%20extends%20an%20incentive,2020

distributing dividends to residents or non-resident shareholders. This is a critical component since the dividend is one of the most popular repatriation tools. There are no withholding taxes in the United Arab Emirates ( Uae) under current legislation. These jurisdictions have tailor-made their policies and tax and incentive structures to incentivise companies to store IPs and create Holding companies as Regional Headquarters. European jurisdictions, such as the Netherlands , provide for participation exemptions on dividends and capital gains (based on certain shareholding thresholds, i.e., 5 per cent and other tests). These exemptions are currently unavailable in India, and any migration of existing structures to India triggers capital gains tax. However, of late, with relatively easy access to Capital through  a  vibrant  Private  Equity/Venture  Capital  Ecosystem,  changes  in  rules  regarding  roundtripping, and the growing maturity of India's capital markets have not only slowed down the Flipping, but companies are also exploring 'Reverse Flipping'.

<!-- image -->

Figure B: effect of Flipping on the structure of the company Pre-Flipping Post-Flipping

<!-- image -->

To accelerate 'Reverse Flipping', certain measures are possible, some of which are listed below:

- i. Simplifying the process for grant of 'Inter-Ministerial Board (IMB) certification' for Start-ups
- ii. Further simplification of taxation of Employee Stock Options (ESOPs)
- iii. Simplifying multiple layers of tax and uncertainty due to tax litigation
- iv. Simplifying procedures for capital flows: Many countries, such as US and Singapore, have easier corporate laws, with lesser restrictions on the inflow and outflow of capital and treatment of Hybrid Securities
- v. Facilitating improved collaboration and partnerships with established private entities to develop best practices and state-of-the-art start-up mentorship platforms
- vi. Exploring  the  incubation  and  funding  landscape  for  start-ups  in  emerging  fields  like  social innovation and impact investment.

The flipping phenomenon mentioned above reflects start-ups venturing out for short-term gains in the dynamic, uncertain geopolitical world. However, the flip can be reversed with the collective action by the Government related regulatory bodies and other stakeholders. With solution-oriented strategies, start-ups will continue to be the messengers of India's entrepreneurial dynamism.

## Structural reforms have enhanced the Ease of Doing Business

- 9.50 The 'Make in India' initiative has been striving to ensure that the business ecosystem in the nation is conducive for investors doing business in India and contributing to the growth and development of the Nation. This has been done through various reforms that have led to increased investment inflows and economic growth. The reform measures include amendments to laws and liberalisation of guidelines and regulations to reduce compliance burdens, bring down costs and enhance the ease of doing business in India. Burdensome compliances with rules and regulations  have  been  reduced  through  simplification,  rationalisation,  decriminalisation, and digitisation. Steps to promote manufacturing and investments include reduction in corporate taxes, public procurement and Phased Manufacturing Programme.
- 9.51 The  DPIIT's  Business  Reform  Action  Plan  (BRAP)  2020  (fifth  edition),  based  on the implementation of reforms by States/UTs, was released on 30 th  June 2022. It shows that 7,496 reforms were implemented across States and UTs as part of the BRAP 2020 assessment, thereby significantly enhancing the Ease of Doing Business across the country. Reducing the Compliance Burden (RCB) on businesses and citizens is a continuous exercise to leapfrog to the next level of governance excellence and improve Ease of Living. Ministries and States/UTs have reduced more than 39,000 compliances (as on 17 th January 2023). Specifically, more than 3,500 provisions related to minor technical or procedural defaults have been decriminalised by Ministries and States/UTs based on details uploaded on DPIIT's Regulatory Compliance Portal as on 17 th  January 2023. Further, the NSWS was soft-launched in September 2021 to improve the  ease  of  doing  business  by  providing  a  single  digital  platform  to  investors  for  approvals and clearances. The portal  is  rapidly  gaining  traction  amongst  the  investor  community  and, as of 10 th January 2023, has about 4.3 lakh plus unique visitors. 81,000+ approvals have been facilitated through NSWS, and 43,000+ approvals are currently under process. The portal will progressively onboard more approvals and licenses based on user /industry feedback. This portal has integrated multiple existing clearance systems of the various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India and State Governments to enhance investor experience.

## India and Industry 4.0

- 9.52 The advent of the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0 as it's commonly referred to,  has  begun.  The  transformation  integrates  new  technologies  such  as  cloud  computing, IoT,  machine  learning,  and  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  into  manufacturing  processes,  leading to efficiencies across the value chain. While the adoption of these technologies in the Indian manufacturing sector is underway, large-scale adoption is yet to happen. However, an enabling environment is rapidly developing. In recent years, India has made significant strides in internet penetration which is one of the key requisites of industry 4.0. The push towards self-reliance in semiconductor technology and production will help India erect another pillar of this revolution - hyper-efficient processing technology.
- 9.53 The government is cognisant of the importance of industry 4.0 in achieving the goals of Aatmanirbharta and its ambitions of becoming a key player in global value chains. A few initiatives  by  the  government  include  the  SAMARTH  (Smart Advanced  Manufacturing  and Rapid Transformation Hubs) Udyog Bharat 4.0 under the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, which aims to encourage technological solutions to Indian manufacturing

units through awareness programmes and demonstrations. Another initiative is the establishment of the Centre for Fourth Industrial Revolution in India in 2018, which looks to develop policy frameworks for emerging technologies.

##