# STATE OF THE ECONOMY: GETTING BACK INTO THE FAST LANE

STATE OF THE ECONOMY: GETTING BACK INTO THE FAST LANE

<!-- image -->

The global economy exhibited steady yet uneven growth across regions in 2024. A notable trend was the slowdown in global manufacturing, especially in Europe and parts of Asia, due to supply chain disruptions and weak external demand. In contrast, the services sector performed better, supporting growth in many economies. Inflationary pressures eased in most economies. However, services inflation has remained persistent. Although commodity prices have stabilised, the risk of synchronised price increases persists. With growth varying across economies and last-mile disinflation proving sticky, central banks may chart varying  paths  of  monetary  easing.  This  will  lead  to  uncertainty  over  future policy rates and inflation trajectories. This apart, geopolitical tensions, ongoing conflicts, and trade policy risks continue to pose significant challenges to global economic stability.

In  this  global  context,  India  displayed  steady  economic  growth.  As  per  the first advance estimates of national accounts, India's real GDP is estimated to grow by 6.4 per cent in FY25. Growth in the first half of FY25 was supported by agriculture and services, with rural demand improving on the back of record Kharif production and favourable agricultural conditions. The manufacturing sector  faced  pressures  due  to  weak  global  demand  and  domestic  seasonal conditions.  Private  consumption  remained  stable,  reflecting  steady  domestic demand. Fiscal discipline and strong external balance supported by a services trade  surplus  and  healthy  remittance  growth  contributed  to  macroeconomic stability.  Together,  these  factors  provided  a  solid  foundation  for  sustained growth amid external uncertainties.

Looking ahead, India's economic prospects for FY26 are balanced. Headwinds to  growth  include  elevated  geopolitical  and  trade  uncertainties  and  possible commodity  price  shocks.  Domestically,  the  translation  of  order  books  of private capital goods sector into sustained investment pick-up, improvements in consumer confidence, and corporate wage pick-up will be key to promoting growth.  Rural  demand  backed  by  a  rebound  in  agricultural  production,  an anticipated easing of food inflation and a stable macro-economic environment provide  an  upside  to  near-term  growth.  Overall,  India  will  need  to  improve its  global  competitiveness  through  grassroots-level  structural  reforms  and deregulation to reinforce its medium-term growth potential.

##