# Pension Sector

pension sectors. Insurance penetration in India has been steadily increasing, with life insurance penetration being above the emerging markets and global averages. Important  government  interventions  and  a  conducive  regulatory  environment  have supported the growth of the insurance market, which has seen increasing partnerships, product innovations, and vibrant distribution channels. India is poised to emerge as one of the fastest-growing insurance markets in the coming decade. The pension sector too has been taking rapid strides since the introduction of the National Pension Scheme (NPS), more recently, the Atal Pension Yojana (APY). The sector has witnessed a robust increase in  the  number  of  subscribers  and  assets  under  management  (AuM).  The  expansion of the sector has been aided by government measures such as relaxation in CCS (Pension) Rules, integration of electronic Pension Payment Order (e-PPO) with DigiLocker, and relaxation in the timeline for submitting Digital Life Certificate.

As global central banks reaffirm their hawkish stances and telegraph 'higher-for-longer' policy rates in their battle against inflation, monetary conditions are expected to remain tight worldwide. Domestically, however, RBI's support to growth will ensure adequate liquidity  in  financial  markets.  The  growth in credit offtake is expected to sustain, and combined with a pick-up in private Capex, will usher in a virtuous investment cycle. The credit upcycle will also be aided by constant monitoring of the risks in the financial system by the regulators and their efforts to contain them. Strong macroeconomic fundamentals will underpin the return of global capital flows to India once the fog of uncertainty lifts. The financial system will play a key role in realising the objectives of Amrit Kaal.

##