# Developments in the Insurance Market

Developments in the Insurance Market

Insurance markets globally have demonstrated remarkable flexibility and resilience in overcoming the impact of the pandemic

4.51  Insurance, an integral part of the financial sector, plays a significant role in economic development.  Apart  from  protecting  against  mortality,  property,  and  casualty  risks  and providing a safety net, the insurance sector encourages savings and provides long-term funds for infrastructure development. The development of the insurance sector is necessary to support its continued economic transformation.

4.52  Internationally,  the  potential  and  performance  of  the  insurance  sector  are  generally assessed based on two parameters, viz., 'insurance penetration', which refers to the ratio of total insurance premiums to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in a year  and 'insurance density', which refers to the ratio of insurance premium to population, i.e.; insurance premium per capita and is measured in US Dollar, as they reflect the level of development of the insurance sector in a country. In 2021, total global insurance premiums grew by 3.4 per cent in real terms, with the non-life insurance sector registering 2.6 per cent growth, driven by rate hardening in commercial lines in developed markets. However, in China, the largest emerging market, non-life premium volumes contracted by 0.7 per cent as the de-tariffication 11 of motor insurance sparked fierce competition and rate reductions.

figure iV.25a: Per cent change in volume of life-insurance premiums in 2021

figure iV.25b: Per cent change in volume of non-life insurance premiums in 2021

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Source: Swiss Re, Sigma various issues

4.53  In the life insurance segment, global premium growth bounced back strongly, registering an increase of 4.5 per cent. The US remained the largest insurance market in the world, with total premiums (non-life and life) of US$ 2.8 trillion in 2021, followed by China and Japan. With the conflict in Ukraine weighing on economic growth in Europe in particular, it is expected that insurance industry growth in emerging markets will outpace that in the developed markets this year, with emerging Asia in the lead.

11    De-tariffication means removing the tariff structure. This allows insurance companies to charge premiums that matches the risk profiles of its consumers. Different insurance companies can charge at a different price to its consumers for the same risk behaviour based on their business risks models and strategies.

## India poised to emerge as one of the fastest-growing insurance markets in the coming decade

4.54  Insurance penetration in India increased steadily from 2.7 per cent around the turn of the millennium to 4.2 per cent in 2020 and remained the same in 2021. Life insurance penetration in India was 3.2 per cent in 2021, almost twice more than the emerging markets and slightly above the  global  average.  However,  most  life  insurance  products  sold  in  India  are  savings-linked, with  just  a  small  protection  component.  Hence,  households  remain  exposed  to  a  significant financing gap in the event of the premature death of the primary breadwinner. Be that as it may, the insurance density in India has increased from US$ 11.1 in 2001 to US$ 91 in 2021 (density for Life insurance was US$ 69 and Non-Life insurance was US$ 22 in 2021) in keeping with the relatively faster expansion of the insurance market in the country.

4.55  During FY22, the gross direct premium of non-Life insurers (within and outside India) registered YoY growth of 10.8 per cent, primarily driven by health and motor segments. The net incurred claims of non-Life insurers stood at ₹1.4 lakh crore in FY22, primarily driven by rising per capita income, product innovations and customisation, development of strong distribution channels, and rising financial literacy. The life insurance premium registered YoY growth of 10.2 per cent in FY22, with new businesses contributing 45.5 per cent of the total premiums received by the life insurers. The life insurance industry paid benefits of ₹5.02 lakh crore in FY22, out of which 8.3 per cent benefits were on death claims.

figure iV.26a: Steady increase in insurance Penetration

Figure IV.26b: Significant rise in insurance density

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Source: Swiss Re, Sigma various issues

4.56  Public  listings  improve  public  disclosure,  corporate  governance,  and  valuation 12 .  In keeping with this understanding, India's largest life insurer, the Life Insurance Corporation of India, went public in May 2022, raising US$ 2.7 billion in the country's largest IPO to date. The private insurance providers have also been seizing such opportunities. The largest private-sector health insurer in the country, was listed in December 2021, making it the fifth private-sector insurer to IPO. The insurance sector is highly competitive and is already witnessing mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A) activity as insurers have tremendous opportunities and volume to co-

12  https://m.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs\_viewcontent.aspx?Id=3619

exist in the space. Additional FDI inflows, IPOs, simplified rules &amp; regulations and improved corporate  valuations  will  likely  further  accelerate  M&amp;A  activities  in  the  sector.  A  rapidly maturing insurance market has provided a lucrative opportunity to the government to privatize its stake in insurance business. Accordingly, the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 2021 allows the central government to pare its stake to less than 51 per cent of the equity capital in a specified insurer.

4.57  To facilitate the penetration of insurance to the lower income segments of the population, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) issued IRDAI (Micro Insurance) Regulations, 2015, which provide a platform for distributing insurance products that are affordable for the rural and urban poor and promote financial inclusion. Further, the IRDAI (Obligations of Insurers to Rural and Social Sectors) Regulations, 2015 stipulate obligations for insurers in rural and social sectors and has contributed to developing and promoting microinsurance products in India. In FY21, 10.7 lakh new micro-insurance policies were issued to individuals with a new business premium of ₹355.3 crore (in the life-insurance segment), and 53,046 new microinsurance policies were issued in the general insurance segment (excluding standalone health insurers).

4.58  Government schemes and financial inclusion initiatives have driven insurance adoption and penetration across all segments. The government's flagship initiative for crop insurance, Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY), has led to significant growth in the premium income for crop insurance. Ayushman Bharat (Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana) (AB PMJAY) aims at providing a health cover of ₹5 lakh per family per year for secondary and tertiary care  hospitalisation.  The  insurance  regulator  IRDAI  has  also  undertaken  various  initiatives towards  boosting  insurance  penetration,  such  as  permitting  insurers  to  conduct  video-based Know Your Customer (KYC), launching standardised insurance products, and allowing insurers to offer rewards for low-risk behaviour. Important government initiatives, strong demographic factors, a conducive regulatory environment, increased M&amp;As, product innovations, and vibrant distribution channels are supporting the insurance market's growth.

A list of various Government Insurance schemes and progress made so far is given in the table below:

table iV.16: government insurance schemes and progress

| Scheme name            | Brief description                                                                                                                                                                | achievement                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ayushman Bharat Yojana | The scheme provides health coverage of ₹5 lakh per beneficiary family per annum to poor and vulnerable families identified based on select deprivation and occupational criteria | Since inception, 19.7 crore beneficiaries have been provided Ayushman cards, and over 4.3 crore hospital admissions worth over ₹0.49 lakh crore have been authorised through a network of 28,667 empanelled health- care providers, including 13,115 private hospitals as of 20th January 2023. |

| Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana     | Under the scheme, risk coverage of ₹2 lakh for accidental death and complete disability and ₹1 lakh for partial disability is given to beneficiaries                                                             | Since its inception, 31.3 crore beneficiaries have been enrolled under the scheme, and 1.07 lakh claims have been disbursed as of 30th November 2022.                      |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana | Under the scheme, risk coverage of ₹2 Lakh is credited to the savings bank account of the holder in case of the death of the insured                                                                             | Since its inception, 14.4 crore beneficiaries have been enrolled under the scheme, and 6.3 lakh claims have been disbursed as of 30th November 2022.                       |
| Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana      | Under the scheme, old age income security is provided to senior citizens through the provision of an assured pension/return linked to the subscription amount based on a government guarantee toLIC              | A total number of 8.6 lakh subscriberswithasubscription amount of ₹84,659.4 crore deposited by these subscribers have benefited under the scheme as of 30th September 2022 |
| Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana        | Under the scheme, risk insurance is provided to farmers against crop damage due to non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post- harvest for the crops/areas notified by the concerned State Government | During 2016 and 2022, 2763.9 lakh applications were received under the scheme, and claims of about ₹ 1.28 lakh crore have been paid to the farmers.                        |

Source: DFS, PIB, PMFBY Dashboard

4.59  Global  life  premiums  are  expected  to  contract  slightly  in  2022  after  last  year's  robust recovery from pandemic-induced lows driven by inflationary pressures, economic uncertainty, and  monetary  tightening.  Saving  premiums  are  expected  to  decline  due  to  volatility  in  the financial markets and as disposable incomes fall. Heightened risk awareness due to Covid-19 may continue to support demand for life protection (and health) insurance products.

4.60  As per the Swiss Re Institute World Insurance: 'Inflation risks front and centre report' 13 , India is one of the fastest-growing insurance markets in the world. In total premium volumes, it  was the 10th largest globally in 2021, with an estimated market share of 1.9 per cent and the second largest of all emerging markets. India is expected to emerge as one of the top six insurance markets in the world by 2032, ahead of Germany, Canada, Italy, and South Korea. Further,  growth in the non-life insurance sector is likely to be driven by demand for health coverage, with people more aware of health security post-Covid-19 and strong support from

13  https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:4500fe30-7d7b-4bc7-b217-085d7d87a35b/swiss-re-institute-sigma-4-2022.pdf https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/Pension-Markets-in-Focus-Preliminary-2021-Data-on-Pension-Funds.pdf

https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/ca401ebd-enpdf?expires=1672272470&amp;id=id&amp;accname=guest&amp;checksum=A210559FD020AD4 78A4ECA831FC94891

the government-sponsored mass health program (Ayushman Bharat). Compulsory motor thirdparty insurance will multiply as India's middle class expands and buys more cars.

4.61  The digitisation of India's insurance market goes beyond telematics and customer risk assessment. Many digital platforms have emerged over recent years, offering various services, including insurance purchases. These measures, accompanied by an increase in FDI limit for Insurance  Companies,  are  likely  to  facilitate  an  increased  flow  of  long-term  capital,  global technology, processes, and international best practices, which will support the growth of India's insurance sector.

## Pension Sector

## India's Pension Sector demonstrated remarkable performance during the Covid-19

4.62  The framework of the pension system has evolved globally. In advanced countries, the pension sector is substantial, partly stemming from a large share of formal salaried employment. While the state provides some basic pension, it is only sometimes funded and thus is a pay-asyou-go scheme relying on current government revenue for pension payments. In 2021, pension assets in OECD countries 14 stood at US$ 38.5 trillion, 66.9 per cent of the GDP. In some of the OECD countries, pension assets were over 100 per cent of the GDP. The United States recorded the largest holdings in pension funds, followed by the United Kingdom and Australia. During Covid-19, countries undertook unprecedented and swift health and pension-related reforms 15 to address health challenges, limit the impact of the crisis on labour markets, support incomes and adjust macroeconomic policies.

4.63  In  addition,  countries  took  other  measures  to  minimise  the  impact  of  Covid-19  on  the marginalised, poor and vulnerable sections such as subsidising wages and pension entitlements through  Job  Retention  Scheme  (JRS),  broadening  the  access  to  unemployment  benefits,  or grant of unemployment insurance to new groups of workers. The United States expanded the coverage of unemployment benefits to the self-employed and Finland broadened the coverage of the already existing scheme for the self-employed. Chile permanently expanded the coverage of unemployment insurance to workers. New Zealand introduced a temporary benefit paid for up to three months to employees who lost their jobs and to the self-employed who stopped their activity.

4.64  The Government of India announced various measures to provide pensions to families who have lost their earning members due to Covid. It also took initiatives towards enhancing and liberalising insurance compensation. The benefit of the Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) pension scheme was extended to even those who have lost earning members due to Covid-19. Dependent family members of such persons were entitled to a pension equivalent to 90 per cent of the average daily wage drawn by the worker as per the existing norms. The insurance benefits under the Employees Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) scheme were also enhanced and liberalised.

4.65  Ex-gratia of ₹1,000 was giv en to around three crore poor senior citizens, widows, and disabled sections of the population (aged above 60 years) for three months during April-June 2020. Rule 64 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, was relaxed to ensure immediate provisional sanction of pensionary benefits amid the unprecedented pandemic. To enhance the 'Ease of

Living' of Central Government Civil Pensioners, an Electronic Pension Payment order (e-PPO) was integrated with Digi Locker, creating a permanent PPO record in the Digi Locker. The timeline for submitting Life Certificate was relaxed, along with providing a doorstep facility to pensioners for submission of the life certificate digitally.

4.66  The Government of India is implementing various pension schemes such as the Indira Gandhi  National  Old  Age  Pension  Scheme  (IGNOAPS),  Indira  Gandhi  National  Widow Pension  Scheme  (IGNWPS),  Indira  Gandhi  National  Disability  Pension  Scheme  (IGNDPS) under the National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) with a total beneficiary coverage of 4.7 crore. The National Pension System (NPS) was introduced in January 2004, the primary pension system for government employees with a pay-as-you-go defined benefit plan. NPS for government employees is a defined contribution plan with co-contribution from the government. The value of the pension corpus is marked-to-market, and accordingly, the rate of return is market determined. NPS was extended to all the citizens of the country in the age group of 18-70 years, including the unorganised sector workers (on a voluntary basis) in 2009. In order to ensure that an avenue for savings is available to all sections of society, PFRDA launched 'NPS-Corporate Sector Model' in 2011 to provide NPS to the employees of corporate entities, including PSUs.

4.67  The Government introduced APY in June 2015 as a part of the overarching objective of providing universal social security. The scheme applies to all individuals aged 18-40 years, with  an  emphasis  on  underprivileged,  unorganised,  and  low-income  individuals.  Since  the introduction of NPS and, more recently, APY, India's pension sector has expanded. The total number of subscribers under the NPS and APY registered a YoY growth of 25.1 per cent in November 2022, with AuM witnessing a growth of 22.7 per cent during the same period. The overall contribution recorded an increase of 27.6 per cent in November 2022, with maximum growth registered by the All-Citizen model followed by the Corporate Sector.

table iV.17: Performance of india's Pension Sector

|                       | no. of Subscribers   | no. of Subscribers   | yoy      | contribution (₹ Crore)   | contribution (₹ Crore)   | yoy      | aUM (₹ Crore)   | aUM (₹ Crore)   | yoy      |
|-----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------|-----------------|-----------------|----------|
|                       | Nov- 21              | Nov- 22              | per cent | Nov-21                   | Nov-22                   | per cent | Nov-21          | Nov-22          | per cent |
| CG+SG                 | 77                   | 83                   | 8        | 3,93,690                 | 4,89,855                 | 24       | 5,55,932        | 6,67,255        | 20       |
| Corporate+All Citizen | 32                   | 42                   | 31       | 8,41,80                  | 1,19,817                 | 42       | 1,07,554        | 1,46,705        | 36       |
| APY                   | 325                  | 429                  | 32       | 16,877                   | 22,437                   | 33       | 19,352          | 24,829          | 28       |

Source: PFRDA

Note: CG stands for Central Government and SG for State Government

4.68  A  survey  by  PFRDA 16 on  the  socio-economic  characteristics  of  NPS  subscribers  (all citizen models) for the five-year period FY17 to FY21 showed that 24 per cent were female subscribers, with the balance 76 per cent being male subscribers. This contrasts with a better gender balance in the case of APY. Female subscribers under APY have increased from nearly

16 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2170

38 per cent in the initial years of the scheme to around 44 per cent by March 2021 17 . Among various states, enrolment from Maharashtra was the highest, accounting for 17 per cent. The age profile of the subscribers in the APY scheme suggests increasing enrolments at younger age. As of August 2022, 44.8 per cent subscribers were between 18 and 25 years, as compared to 29.3 per cent as on March 2016 18 . Further, more people are now opting for a pension amount of ₹1000 per month. As of March 2022, around 76 per cent of subscribers have opted for ₹1000 per month pension amount, as compared to 38 per cent of subscribers as on March 2016. However, the number of subscribers opting for ₹5000 per month pension has declined from 47 per cent as of March 2016 to 15 per cent as of March 2022. The coverage of the population in pension under NPS and APY as a share of the total population has raised from 1.2 per cent to 3.7 per cent during the six years FY17 to FY22. Assets as a proportion of GDP have increased from 1.2 per cent to 3.2 per cent, reflecting that the pension sector is progressing much faster than the nominal growth of the economy and population.

- 4.69  PFRDA  has  undertaken  various  measures  to  ease  the  accessibility  of  NPS  and  APY to  subscribers,  such  as  reducing  timelines  for  processing  settlements  to  T+2  days.  Central Recordkeeping Agencies have integrated their systems with DigiLocker to provide Subscriber Centric Services such as electronic-Pension Retirement Account Number (e-PRAN), electronic Account statements, and Aadhar &amp; DigiLocker-based account openings. Government sector subscribers can change their investment choices online by submitting the request directly in the CRA login. The contributions through the UPI handle can be accepted for the benefit of NPS subscribers, permitting them to remit funds into their PRAN via the Virtual account number provided by CRA.
- 4.70  There is tremendous scope for growth in India's pension sector as per capita income is expected to rise further as the economy transitions to a high-middle-income country. India's demographic structure, with a more significant proportion of younger people, favours a phase of accumulation. However, financial literacy is a significant challenge not only in emerging market economies but also in advanced economies. PFRDA, under the aegis of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC), has taken several steps to enhance financial education so that consumers can make informed decisions and reap the benefit of the formal financial sector while being cognizant of risks and various trade-offs involved. These include pension education through  print  and  electronic  media,  outreach  programs  through  trade  bodies,  intermediaries such as banks, and town hall events.
- 4.71  India's pension sector provides a flexible mode of old age income-security for salaried employees and the common person. In the recent five years, FY18 to FY22, the number of subscribers has multiplied over three-fold, led by APY, and AUM by over four-fold, led by NPS. The future expansion in NPS is expected to emanate from the private sector, both the salaried and self-employed. Steps towards enhanced pension literacy, both of the subscribers and the intermediaries, coupled with a nudge from the regulator and the government, along with encouragement to young adults to join a pension scheme, would accelerate the movement towards a pensioned society.

17 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2307

18 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2296

## Outlook

4.72  The resilience of the domestic financial system is reflected in the healthy balance sheet of banks, stronger capital levels of NBFCs and robust growth in the AuM of domestic mutual funds. Buoyant demand for bank credit and early signs of a revival in the investment cycle are benefiting from improving asset quality, a return to profitability and resilient capital and liquidity buffers. Further, IBC mechanism continues to support the 'Ease of Doing Business' in India by facilitating easy exit with time bound resolutions for firms. These strengths are helping the financial system absorb external spillovers, tightening global financial conditions and high volatility in financial markets.

4.73  India  is  one  of  the  fastest-growing  insurance  markets  in  the  world  and  is  expected  to emerge  as  one  of  the  top  six  insurance  markets  by  2032.  Digitisation  of  India's  insurance market, accompanied by an increase in FDI limit for insurance companies, is likely to facilitate an increased flow of long-term capital, a global technology, processes, and international best practices,  which  will  support  the  growth  of  India's  insurance  sector. Also,  as  we  transition to  a  high  middle-income economy, India's pension sector has tremendous scope for growth. Government initiatives towards enhancing pension literacy of subscribers and intermediaries, and a nudge from the regulator and the government to encourage young adults to join the pension scheme would play a significant role in enhancing pension availability to a more extensive section of society.