# Outlook

outlook,  the domestic appetite for credit has been on an upswing. Non-food credit offtake by scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) has been growing in double digits since April 2022, with the increase  being  broad-based.  Credit  disbursed  by  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies (NBFCs) has also been on the rise. The balance sheet clean-up exercise has been vital in enhancing the lending ability of financial institutions. The Gross Non-Performing Assets (GNPA) ratio of SCBs has fallen to a seven-year low of 5.0, while the Capital-to-Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) remains healthy at 16.0 and well above the regulatory requirement of 11.5. The health of NBFCs has continued to improve as well. The recovery rate for the SCBs through Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) was highest in FY22 compared to other channels.

Political  and  economic  developments  in  2022  -  the  breakout  of  a  conflict  in  Europe, high inflation and raising interest rates - meant that capital markets around the world were characterised by increased volatility. However, domestic capital markets displayed some encouraging trends. The primary equity markets witnessed participation from all segments, especially with increased Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) contributions

while primary private debt markets saw a growth in placements and resource mobilisation. While secondary capital market indices of the Nifty 50 and the S&amp;P BSE Sensex were not immune to the volatility in Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) flows, they performed better than their peers between April and December 2022. Furthermore, net FPI flows turned  positive  in  the  quarter  ending  December  2022.  The  indices  have  displayed  a decreasing trend in volatility as measured by the India Volatility Index (VIX) over this period. Both developments underscore India's strong macroeconomic fundamentals and relatively buoyant demand outlook.

The increasing  outreach  of  the  banking  sector  and  capital  markets  is  reflected  in  the insurance and