# Government's Vision and Approaches to Infrastructure Development in India

## government's Vision and approaches to infrastructure development in india

12.10 Increase in infrastructure investment provides a critical push to the potential growth of the economy. The government, in recent years, provided an increased impetus for infrastructure development and investment through the enhancement of capital expenditure. This push has happened at a time of crisis when the capital expenditure by the private sector has been subdued. The outlay (target) for capital expenditure in 2022-23 (BE) was increased sharply by 35.4 per cent from ₹ 5.5 lakh crore in the previous year (2021-22) to ₹ 7.5 lakh crore, of which approximately 67 per cent has been spent from April to December 2022.

figure Xii.2: central government has sharply increased capital expenditure in the last two consecutive years*

<!-- image -->

* All figures are representative of Budgeted Estimates for the respective Financial Year Source: Union Budget of India

- 12.11 The  result  of  the  efforts  is  visible  in  Ministries'/  Departments'  Capex  spending  till December 2022, which has been ₹5 lakh crore (around 67 per cent has been achieved against the Budgeted Capex of 7.5 lakh crore) as against ₹3.9 lakh crore for the same period in FY22 (i.e., till December 2021). The actual expenditure in FY23 is also 28 per cent higher than the expenditure in FY22 for the corresponding period.
- 12.12 The steady increase in public capital expenditure has helped support economic growth while laying the foundation for future growth as capital assets boost economic efficiency and potential growth. It could also crowd in private investment, as the IMF observed in the case of India 9 . This is evident from the fact that capacity utilisation in the private sector has been recovering.
- 12.13 While the NIP and the NMP would provide the much-needed impetus for stepping up infrastructure investment, the NLP will address the gaps in services, digital infrastructure and skills in the logistics workforce. PM GatiShakti, with a multimodal approach, is designed to fill  the  gaps  in  physical  infrastructure  and  to  integrate  existing  and  proposed  infrastructure development initiatives  of  different  agencies. As  physical  infrastructure  requires  continuous support  over  its  long  gestation  period,  the  government  has  also  set  up  National  Bank  for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) as development financial institution to set in motion a virtuous investment cycle. An institutional mechanism to fast-track investments has been put in place, in the form of Project Development Cells (PDCs) in all concerned Ministries/ Departments of Government of India.
- 12.14 The  government's  vision  for  infrastructure  does  not  stop  here. As  India  has  already submitted its Long-Term Low Emission Development Strategy at COP27, the next leap would be towards advanced infrastructure, which is more energy efficient, incorporates the idea of a circular economy and transitions towards low carbon development. The amount of investment that  may be needed for putting in place climate resilient and climate resistant infrastructure might be too vast to be provided for by either the public sector or the private sector alone. Both financing and the creation of such infrastructure are likely to require Public-Private Partnership, a topic to which we turn next.

## Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs)

- 12.15 Private  investment  in  infrastructure  is  mainly  in  the  form  of  PPPs.  PPPs  are  vital  instruments for governments in channelling the strength of private sector in critical areas of infrastructure. It helps to address infrastructure gap and improve efficiency in infrastructure service delivery. The very success of PPPs lies in the robustness of institutional structure, financial support, and use and availability of standardised documents, such as Model Request for Qualification (RFQ), Model Request for Proposal (RFP) and Model Concession Agreements (MCAs).
- 12.16 In India, private participation in infrastructure programmes supports several PPP models, including  management  contracts  like  Build-Operate-Transfer  (BOT),  Design-Build-FinanceOperate-Transfer  (DBFOT),  Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer  (ROT),  Hybrid  Annuity  Model (HAM), and Toll-Operate-Transfer (TOT) model. Under the BOT model, there are two variants - BOT (Toll) and BOT (Annuity) depending on who bears the traffic risk. In the case of BOT

9 Bahal, Girish &amp; Raissi, Mehdi &amp; Tulin, Volodymyr. (2018). Crowding-Out or Crowding-In? Public and Private Investment in India.

- (Toll), the traffic risk is borne by the PPP concessionaire, while in the case of BOT (Annuity), it is borne by the public authority.
- 12.17 The Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC), the apex body for appraisal of  PPP  projects  in  the  Central  Sector  has  streamlined  appraisal  mechanism  to  ensure  speedy appraisal of projects, eliminate delays, adopt international best practices and have uniformity in appraisal mechanism and guidelines. The PPPAC is chaired by Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) with Secretaries of Department of Expenditure, Department of Legal Affairs, the Sponsoring Ministry/Department and CEO, NITI Aayog as members to consider and appraise the proposals for Central Sector PPP Projects. The Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee has cleared 79 projects with a total project cost of ₹2,27,268.1 crore from FY15 to FY23.
- 12.18 To  provide  financial  assistance  to  financially  unviable  but  socially/  economically desirable PPP projects, DEA launched the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme in 2006. Under this scheme, economic sector projects may get up to 40 per cent of Capex as VGF grant. The Scheme includes higher provisions of VGF grant for social sectors. Social sectors may get up to 80 per cent of the Capex and up to 50 per cent of the Operating Expenditure (Opex) for five years after Commercial Operation Date (CoD) as VGF grant.
- 12.19 Social Sector projects get VGF under two categories: Sub Scheme-1 and Sub-Scheme-2. Sub-Scheme-1 caters to social sectors such as wastewater treatment, water supply, solid waste management etc. The projects under this category should have at least 100 per cent Operational Cost recovery. The Government of India (GoI) will provide a maximum of 30 per cent of Capex and the State Government concerned may provide an additional support of up to 30 per cent of Capex. Sub-scheme 2 supports demonstration/pilot projects from Health &amp; Education sectors. The projects eligible under this category should have at least 50 per cent Operational Cost recovery. The GoI will provide a maximum of 40 per cent of the Capex of the project and a maximum of 25 per cent of the Opex of the project for the first five years of commercial operations as VGF.
- 12.20 From 2014-15 to 2022-23, under the VGF Scheme, 56 projects with TPC of ₹57870.1 crore were granted In-Principle Approval and 27 projects with TPC of ₹25263.8 crore were granted final approval with a Total Viability Gap Funding approval of ₹5813.6 crore (Both GoI &amp; State Share). The GoI share of approved VGF is ₹3102.6 crore and the State Share of Total VGF approved is ₹2710.9 crore. The total VGF amount disbursed by DEA under the scheme from FY15 to FY23 is ₹2982.4 crore.
- 12.21 A scheme for financial  support  for  project  development  expenses  of  PPP  Projects  the  'India  Infrastructure  Project  Development  Fund  Scheme'  (IIPDF)  -  was  notified  by  the government on 3 November 2022. The aim of the scheme is to develop quality PPP projects by providing necessary funding support to the project-sponsoring authorities, both in the Central and State Governments, for creating a shelf of bankable, viable PPP projects by on-boarding transaction advisers.
- 12.22 IIPDF Scheme has a total outlay of ₹150 crore for a period of 3 years from FY23 to FY25. Under the scheme, a maximum amount of ₹5 crore for a single proposal, inclusive of any tax implications, can be funded, which can include the cost of consultants/transaction advisers of a PPP project. Any funding requirement over and above ₹5 crore may be borne by the project sponsoring authority itself, and funding under IIPDF shall not be recovered.

## national infrastructure Pipeline (niP)

12.23 A developing economy such as ours requires a continued stepping up of infrastructure investment to sustain a high rate of growth, which in turn is a pre-requisite for achieving wideranging social objectives. In view of this, the government launched the National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) with a forward-looking approach and with a projected infrastructure investment of  around  ₹111  lakh  crore  during  FY20-25  to  provide  high  quality  infrastructure  across  the country. It also envisages improving project preparation and attracting domestic and foreign investment in infrastructure. The NIP includes infrastructure projects of more than ₹100 crore covering  greenfield  and  brownfield  investments. The  NIP  currently  has  8,964  projects  with a  total  investment  of  more  than  ₹108  lakh  crore  under  different  stages  of  implementation. Regarding sectoral composition, the transport sector constituted more than half of the projects.

figure Xii.3: status of Projects under niP

<!-- image -->

Source: Department of Economic Affairs.

Note: Data as of 13 January 2023

figure Xii.4: transportation sector dominates the niP

<!-- image -->

Source: Department of Economic Affairs.

Note: Data as of 13 January 2023

12.24 NIP is hosted on the Invest India Grid (IIG) platform and provides opportunities for States/UTs and Ministries to collate all major infrastructure projects at a single location. IIG thus acts as a centralised portal to track and review project progress across all economic and social infrastructure sub-sectors. The portal also enables project-sponsoring authorities to showcase investment  opportunities  to  national  and  international  investors.  Project  Monitoring  Group (PMG) is an institutional mechanism put in place by the government for resolution of issues related to large-scale projects. PMG is also involved in the fast-tracking of approvals/clearances

for projects with an anticipated investment of ₹500 crore and above. Now, it has been proposed to integrate NIP and PMG portals. When implemented, NIP will become the first entry point (database) for all infrastructure projects (costing ₹100 crore or more). PMG portal will pick up data, as per requirements (project cost of  ₹500 crore or more), from the NIP database. This will save substantial time and effort by Ministries and States/UTs and ease the monitoring of large infrastructure projects.

## national Monetisation Pipeline - creation through monetisation

12.25 The need for scaling up infrastructure investment despite fiscal pressures from Covid-19 pandemic  required  unlocking  of  capital  from  various  projects  across  sectors.  The  National Monetisation Pipeline (NMP), was thus announced on 23 August 2021. Based on the principle of 'asset creation through monetisation', it taps private sector investment for new infrastructure creation.

- 12.26 It  is  expected  that  private  players  would  operate  and  maintain  the  assets.  The  NMP  provides an opportunity for deleveraging balance sheets and providing fiscal space for investment in new infrastructure assets. The estimated aggregate monetisation potential under NMP is ₹6.0 lakh crore through core assets of the Central Government, over a four-year period, from FY20-25.
- 12.27 The process of monetisation entails a limited period license/ lease of an asset, owned by the government or a public authority, to a private sector entity for upfront or periodic consideration. Funds so received by the public authority are reinvested in new infrastructure or deployed for other public purposes. Such contracts include provisions for the transfer of assets back to the authority at the end of the contract period. It includes a selection of de-risked and brownfield assets with a stable revenue generation profile (or long-term revenue rights) that can be clearly ring-fenced. It contains 20+ asset classes across 12+ line ministries/ departments.  In addition, the top 5 sectors (by estimated value) capture around 83 per cent of the aggregate pipeline value: roads (27 per cent) followed by railways (25 per cent), power (15 per cent), oil &amp; gas pipelines (8 per cent), and telecom (6 per cent). Roads and railways together contribute around 52 per cent of the total NMP value.
- 12.28 Against the monetisation target of ₹0.9 lakh crore in FY22, ₹0.97 lakh crore have been achieved during the period under roads, power, coal and mines. The cumulative investment potential over the years of transactions completed is estimated at ₹9.0 lakh crore (value captured in the form of accruals, receipts, and/or private investment). NMP's 2nd year, i.e., FY23, target envisaged is ₹1.6 lakh crore (27 per cent of overall NMP Target) under Core-Asset Monetisation. This is an indicative value while the actual realization for public assets may differ depending on the timing, transaction structuring, investor interest, etc.

## national logistics Policy: reducing the cost of logistics

12.29 Given that India aims to increase its exports manifold, it is important that the logistics aspects, that will facilitate this goal, be addressed. Logistics costs in India have been in the range of 14-18 per cent of GDP against the global benchmark of 8 per cent. Key dimensions to be addressed to improve logistics for trade include: ensuring efficiency of the clearance process (i.e., speed, simplicity, and predictability of formalities) by border control agencies, including customs; improving the quality of trade and transport-related infrastructure (e.g., ports, railroads, roads, information technology); easing of arranging competitively priced shipments; enhancing the competence and quality of logistics services (e.g., transport operators, customs brokers);

providing for tracking and tracing of consignments and ensuring timeliness of shipments in reaching destinations within the scheduled or expected delivery time. These aspects have been captured by the World Bank in the form of a Logistics Performance Index (LPI).

- 12.30 Many efforts have already been made by the Government of India to improve the logistics ecosystem  through  'infrastructure  initiatives'  such  as  Ude  Desh  ka  Aam  Nagrik  (UDAN), Bharatmala, Sagarmala, Parvatamala, National Rail Plan, and through 'process reforms' GST, e-Sanchit,  Single  Window  Interface  for  Trade  (SWIFT),  Indian  Customs  Electronic  Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE), Turant Customs, and others.
- 12.31 However, a need was felt to integrate all these efforts by different government agencies and lay an overarching interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral, and multi-jurisdictional framework for the logistics sector. To realise this idea, NLP was launched on 17 September 2022, addressing the components of improving efficiency in logistics through streamlining processes, regulatory framework, skill development, and mainstreaming logistics among others.
- 12.32 The vision of the NLP is 'to develop a technologically enabled, integrated, cost-efficient, resilient, sustainable and trusted logistics ecosystem in the country for accelerated and inclusive growth.' The policy is an endeavour to improve the competitiveness of Indian goods, enhance economic growth and increase employment opportunities. It is aimed at bringing global standards to warehousing, multimodal digital integration, ease of logistics services, human resources, and skill enhancement.
- 12.33 The targets for achieving the vision of the NLP are to (i) reduce the cost of logistics in India to be comparable to global benchmarks by 2030; (ii) improve the Logistics Performance Index ranking - endeavour is to be among the top 25 countries by 2030, and (iii) create a datadriven decision support mechanism for an efficient logistics ecosystem.
- 12.34 The Policy will be implemented through a Comprehensive Logistics  Action Plan (CLAP). The interventions under the CLAP are divided into specific key action areas, including Integrated Digital Logistics Systems, standardisation of physical assets &amp; benchmarking service quality standards, Logistics Human Resources Development and Capacity Building, State Engagement, EXIM (Export-Import) Logistics, Service Improvement framework, Sectoral Plan for Efficient Logistics and Facilitation of Development of Logistics Parks.
- 12.35 Among other steps taken to enhance logistics performance in the country, there has been an initiative to undertake a sub-national view of the state of logistics in the country through the Logistics Ease Across Different States (LEADS) index. The following Box provides some details of this initiative. 10

## Box Xii.1: logistics ease across different states

The  Government  undertook  a  survey-based  assessment  of  logistics  ease  in  various  States and UTs in the form of the LEADS index in 2018 to gauge their logistics ecosystem. It was followed by surveys in 2019, 2021, and 2022 10 .  Each  of  these  surveys  has  been  aimed  at analysing the business environment at the State level relating to the logistics infrastructure, policy framework, and regulatory regime, across States and UTs.

10 The survey could not be undertaken in 2020 in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

It  is  based  on  a  stakeholders'  survey  and  uses  the  World  Bank's  Logistics  Performance Index  (LPI)  methodology.  The  State  LPI  is  arrived  at  using  a  ranking  methodology  for stakeholder engagement based on a series of meetings and online surveys in the key areas of logistics- infrastructure, services timelines, traceability, competitiveness, security, operating environments, and efficiency of regulation. Following the LEADS initiative, 13 States/UTs have prepared and notified their logistic policies.

The LEADS 2022 survey report was released on 13 October 2022, which considered the PM GatiShakti  NMP  and  current  developments  in  the  logistics  sector  in  the  wake  of  the COVID-19 pandemic. The survey has garnered more than 6500 responses from more than 2100 respondents across the country. Unlike the previous versions of LEADS which were based on ranking systems for all states, LEADS 2022 has adopted a classification-based grading, and  States  have  been  now  classified  under  four  categories  viz.,  coastal  States,  hinterland/ landlocked States, North-Eastern States, and UTs for the assessment of how well a State or UT has performed in comparison to the top State/UT within the specific cluster.

Taking a break from the past, states have not been ranked in order. This time, they have been allotted three performance categories, namely, Achievers: States/UTs achieving a percentage score of 90 per cent or more, Fast Movers: States/UTs achieving percentage scores between 80 to 90 per cent, and Aspirers: States/UTs achieving percentage scores below 80 per cent. The results are indicated below.

<!-- image -->

## PM gatishakti: a master plan for integrated project planning

12.36 The  growth  experience  of  advanced  economies  has  highlighted  the  importance  of having a multimodal transport network approach. Introducing the holistic planning in the case of infrastructure projects, the government launched PM GatiShakti, charting a transformative approach  to  infrastructure  development.  The  PM  GatiShakti  National  Master  Plan  entails creation of a common umbrella platform with all infrastructure projects pertaining to various ministries/ departments incorporated within a comprehensive database for efficient planning and implementation on a real-time basis. The projects pertaining to seven engines (roads, railways, airports, ports, mass transport, waterways, and logistic infrastructure) in the NIP will be aligned with PM GatiShakti framework. The touchstone of the Master Plan will be high quality modern infrastructure and logistics synergy among different modes of movement - both of people and of goods - and location of projects. This will help raise productivity, and accelerate economic growth and development.

- 12.37 The focus is on integrated planning and synchronised implementation across ministries/ departments, with innovative use of technology. The aim is to improve multimodal connectivity and logistics efficiency while addressing the critical gaps for the seamless movement of people and goods, with a focus on minimising disruptions and timely completion of infrastructure projects.
- 12.38 In  order  to  facilitate  integrated  planning  and  coordinated  implementation,  a  GISbased and data-driven decision support platform called PM GatiShakti National Master Plan has been introduced. Around 1950 data layers of 22 ministries/departments and 36 States/UTs were mapped up to the village, district, and taluka levels on the national master plan. It can be integrated with various applications of different ministries/agencies to prevent duplication of work and create a single window system for infrastructure planning. Data layers on important assets pertaining to health, education, culture, tourism, gram panchayats, municipal corporation, social welfare housing etc. are being mapped and data validation is being done for optimum use of PM GatiShakti principles in planning of both physical and social infrastructures. Use cases of GatiShakti National Master Plan include connectivity to model schools and disaster management planning etc.