# Challenges and Opportunities

## CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

12.63.  As  the  different  sections  in  this  Chapter  show,  there  has  been  a  quantum  jump  in infrastructure build-up in the last five years. However, there are some areas for corrective and collective actions, as presented in this section.

12.64. Land Related: Despite the large build-up of connectivity infrastructure and energyrelated assets, both the sectors reported the need for corrections in the delay in land acquisition, and  land-related  clearances.  Issues  are  also  raised  about  slow  on-boarding  of  digital  land records. In the case of airport development, greenfield airport projects are time-intensive due to the need for appropriate site selection, land acquisition and necessary approvals. Addressing challenges related to land in physical infrastructure requires coordinated action at different tiers of the Government.

12.65. Skill  Demands: The  aviation  sector  highlighted  that  technical  knowledge  for  the development of segments such as maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO) operations and manufacturing are concentrated with a limited number of original equipment manufacturers. The airline industry is a highly competitive segment, susceptible to external shocks such as oil  prices,  exchange  rates,  epidemics,  wars,  and  equipment  issues.  These  shocks  can  affect the operations of an airline and impact its viability, hence the development of capabilities in segments such as MRO, leasing and skilling are needed to further support the airlines. Many aspects related to project development, feasibility assessment, financial return analysis and different stages of project management, in the case of infrastructure projects, involve specialised technical skills that need to be nurtured based on systematic need assessment. Effective publicprivate participation is essential for this.

- 12.66. Need to improve private participation: The addition to the stock of infrastructure in the last five years owed predominantly to public sector financing. Private sector participation is not forthcoming to the extent desired. Literature suggests that many factors are impeding private participation in infrastructure building. Some of the important ones are the following:
- a. Lumpy capital investment and long payback period and difficulty in mobilising large equity and debt at affordable cost. Many novel PPP financing models like hybrid annuity model, have been introduced to mitigate this constraint. But private sector participation through these modes has so far been limited to only certain sectors like roads and water.
- b. Project structuring issues related to risk estimation, allocation and mitigation
- c. Delays in getting clearances and land acquisition
- d. Lack of an independent regulator for infrastructural sectors, etc.
- e. Contractual issues and inadequate arrangements for dispute resolution and arbitration, leading to prolonged litigation.

12.67.  The  question  of climate  and  environmental  sustainability is  increasingly becoming  important  in  infrastructure  building  as  discussed  in  the  sections  on  physical connectivity and energy infrastructure. An emerging challenge for the aviation sector would be  compliance  with  mandatory  phase  of  the  Carbon  Offsetting  and  Reduction  Scheme  for International Aviation (CORSIA) from 2027. Since India is a Member State of ICAO, obligated to comply with offsetting requirements i.e., either use sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) or offset their emissions by purchasing carbon credits from ICAO approved emissions unit programmes. However, there are no ICAO-approved emissions unit programmes in India to supply CORSIAeligible emissions units, to meet the offsetting requirements of airline operators. The cost of SAF is almost 3 to 5 times the cost of fossil ATF depending on the feedstock and pathway used for the production of SAF 29 .

- 12.68. Lack  of  aggregation  of  financial  flows  into  infrastructure: Infrastructure financing structure is complex with the involvement of multiple stakeholders, including all tiers of  the  Government, public sector enterprises, commercial banks and non-banking financial companies, special purpose vehicles, capital market players, development financial institutions and foreign investors. The instruments of resource mobilisation are many, i.e., credit, bonds, equities, hybrid instruments like mutual funds, foreign capital inflows and instruments like InvITs and REITS. The following are some issues that merit attention:
- a. A  common  issue  is  about  different  reporting  formats  and  sectoral  splits  followed  in different sources of financing. The detailed information required for the Central and State Governments can be obtained from the object heads of expenditure maintained by the CGA and C&amp;AG. However, such detailed information on sectoral financial flows is hard to come by for almost all other sources. Besides, the information of bank credit is reported in a different format than the capital market flows, external commercial borrowings and FDI data. The periodicity of reporting, and even the definition of the term 'infrastructure'

29    Working Paper on Views on Global Framework on SAF, LCAF and other Aviation Cleaner Energies, Related Assistance and Finance, International Civil Aviation Organization, 2023 - https://tinyurl.com/yck3bwbs

employed are also different. Some data, like the data on bank credit, are available only as an outstanding figure on a particular date.

- b. Among the Government sources, the available information on the capital expenditure by the local self-governments is inadequate. The city finance portal of MoHUA is an important source of information on the finances of urban self-governments. Likewise, the eGramSwaraj portal, maintained by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, is an emerging source on the finances of rural self-governments. However, the information on capital expenditure, with sectoral split, is not available in good shape from these portals.
- c. The  information  on  budgetary  support  by  State  Governments  to  State  public  sector enterprises (SPSEs) is available in the C&amp;AG reports. However, there is no ready source of information on the fund flow from SPSEs to infrastructure sectors.
- d. One exhaustive source of information on the capital expenditure by the private corporations (and public sector enterprises) is the MCA database. However, expansive data filings by companies become available only with a lag, which also require rigorous consistency checks before attempting any aggregation.
- e. There are several forms of flow of funds between different infrastructure financing sources, which makes a simple aggregation of all sources largely meaningless. Such financial flows occur between different tiers of the Government, between Governments and their public enterprises, between banks and NBFCs, etc. Hence, avoiding double counting of financial flows requires careful scrutiny of different datasets.

12.69. Lack of total  picture  of  physical  progress  in  infrastructure  projects: The last decade witnessed earnest efforts on the part of the Government to build institutions and structures that monitor progress in infrastructure and disentangle bottlenecks. A discussion on these measures follows this section. However, there is no single source that gives an inventory of infrastructure projects in the country, undertaken at different levels so as to evaluate progress sectorally  and  sub-sectorally  vis-à-vis  corresponding  targets.  Overcoming  this  limitation involves  coordination  of  central,  state  and  the  third  tiers  of  the  Government  working  with project authorities, including public sector enterprises and private partners.