# Conclusions and Outlook

## CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

12.77. Transformative changes have dawned upon the infrastructure landscape of India in the last decade in terms of facilitative institutional architecture and the quality and stock of infrastructure assets. The consistent focus on road, rail and air connectivity, sanitation and digital infrastructure have brought in a considerable growth in assets in these sectors.

12.78.  However, infrastructure-creation efforts in India are predominantly public sector-led. As per the Infrastructure Monitor 2023 published by Global Infrastructure Hub and the World Bank, India's investment in infrastructure was largely funded by the public sector - which includes the Government agencies and state-owned entities and banks 31 . Between fiscal year 2019 and 2023, the Central and State Governments contributed to 49 per cent and 29 per cent of the total investments, respectively, while the private sector contributed 22 per cent 32 .

12.79. For India to continue down the path of building quality infrastructure, a higher level of private sector financing and resource mobilisation from new sources will be crucial. Facilitating this  would  not  only  require  policy  and  institutional  support  from  the  Central  Government, but State and Local Governments would have to play an equally important role. International experience shows us how initiatives at the sub-national level can facilitate resource mobilisation for infrastructure development. Examples include pooled financing mechanisms for municipal projects 33 ,  specialised  municipal  intermediaries 34 ,  asset  recycling  programs 35 ,  tax  increment financing 36  and land sales and development rights 37  among other innovative approaches. Each of the measures witnessed broad-based implementation, succeeding in mobilising finances for critical infrastructure projects.

12.80.  As mentioned above, there is a need to improve data capture and reporting mechanisms for investments in infrastructure across instruments and sectors as well its composition across different projects on a granular level. The Rangarajan Commission Report on Infrastructure Statistics  (2001)  had  underscored  the  importance  of  collecting  and  maintaining  a  reliable statistical database for the infrastructure sector. Major strides have been made since then to collect data on policy direction, institutional strength, project performance and monitoring. However, data gaps persist in some key areas.

31    Infrastructure Monitor 2023: Global trends in private investment in infrastructure, Global Infrastructure Hub

32    CRISIL Infrastructure Yearbook 2023

33    Municipal Pooled Financing of Infrastructure in the United States: Experience and Lessons, the World Bank Group,  June  2017.  A  municipal  bond  bank  allows  smaller  municipalities  to  collectively  access  the  financial markets, thus lowering cost of funds borrowed.

34    Innovative Approaches to Municipal Infrastructure Financing, Commonwealth Library (based on the Vietnam experience). Local Development Investment Funds are operational and legal vehicles for provincial governments to mobilize funds and enter into contracts with the private-sector.

35    Robust sector-specific pipelines enable effective asset-recycling program, Global Infrastructure Hub, November 2015 (based on the Australian experience). This mechanism allows the State Government to sell public assets to the private sector and utilise the proceeds for new infrastructure development.

36    Report on the use of Tax Increment Financing, Prepared for Governor's Office of Planning and Research, State of California, December 2020. This is a subsidy given for redevelopment, infrastructure, and other communityimprovement projects.

37    Developing  the  Business  and  Financial District in Marina Bay, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore, 2016 (based on Singapore experience). The local government sold parcels of  land  and  granted  development  rights  to  private  participants  for  residential,  commercial  and  mixed-use development.

- a. Existing databases fall short on assessing the demand for infrastructure and tracking the utilisation of facilities built in the sub-sectors. Demand aggregation can provide an insight into the appetite for infrastructure projects based on sub-sectors and regions, while the construction of an index that tracks the utilisation rates would shed light on sub-sectors where  there  is  either  an  oversupply  or  shortfall  of  required  infrastructure  facilities. Addressing  these  two  gaps  can  provide  additional  diagnostic  measures  for  enabling policymakers and other stakeholders to optimally allocate scarce resources.
- b. Currently,  statistics  on  the  infrastructure  sector  can  be  derived  from  several  available databases  such  as  the  National  Infrastructure  Pipeline,  the  PPP  India  Portal,  heads  of budget accounts and reports of the respective infrastructure focused ministries, fund flows of  Central  and  State  Public  Sector  Enterprises  and  financial  flows  to  the  infrastructure sector from Non-Governmental institutions such as Banks, NBFCs and the Capital Markets. These databases are useful to assess infrastructure statistics at the project level and to track financial  flows  at  the  sectoral  level.  However,  when  attempting  to  assess  infrastructure spending and development across time based on the Harmonized List (HML) classifications for a macro-level overview, these databases fall short due to the lack of consistency in the frequency of data collection, lack of uniformity in the methodology followed and cross fund flows between institutions which can lead to double counting. This also makes comparing data  from  different  sources  difficult.  Therefore,  going  forward,  it  would  be  useful  if  a mechanism is developed for consolidating infrastructure development and financial flow data from various sources, as per the HML classification, under a single access point which is updated at a regular frequency. It would also be of use to policymakers if the consolidated statistics are recorded with the public and private sector bifurcation.

********