# Agriculture Extension: The Enabler

## AGRICULTURE EXTENSION: The Enabler

9.31 Agricultural extension is vital in disseminating knowledge, enhancing productivity,  and  promoting  sustainable  agricultural  practices.  The  government is  implementing  the  Sub-Mission  on  Agricultural  Extension  (SMAE)  to  bolster agricultural extension services, enhance entrepreneurship and improve productivity in the agricultural sector throughout India. A key component of the SMAE is the support provided by the Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA), which focuses on  sharing  the  latest  agricultural  technologies  to  boost  production.  The  initiatives include farmer training, demonstrations, exposure visits, kisan melas, mobilisation of farmer groups, and the establishment of farm schools. During the FY24 period, over 3.66 million farmers benefitted from these extension activities, with an additional 4.49 million having availed themselves of these benefits by November 2024. Furthermore, the government has launched the short duration skill training of rural youth scheme to offer short-term skill training to rural youth and farmers in agriculture and related fields. So far, 20940 candidates were trained as of November 2024 of which 5504 were trained in FY25. To address the training needs of middle-level field extension workers, the government has established four regional extension education institutes located in  Haryana, Telangana, Gujarat, and Assam. During FY24, 8,175 extension workers underwent training, with an additional 2,195 trained by November 2024. In addition to training programs, the government operates the Kisan Call Centre to address farmers' queries regarding agriculture and allied sectors. Responses to these queries are provided in 22 official languages from 17 locations nationwide.