# PRICES AND INFLATION: UNDER CONTROL

## PRICES AND INFLATION: UNDER CONTROL

<!-- image -->

The pandemic and subsequent geo-political tensions presented considerable challenges to  the  global  economy in inflation management. The supply disruptions inflicted by the pandemic and increased commodity prices caused by heightened global conflicts markedly affected India. As a result, FY22 and FY23 witnessed price pressures in core consumer goods and services. Food prices were affected by adverse weather conditions in the last two years. The net impact of these developments was elevated inflationary pressures in FY23 and FY24. Prudent monetary policy response and calibrated trade policy measures by the Government, coupled with strong output growth, helped reduce core inflation to a four-year low in FY24. Appropriate administrative actions, including dynamic stock management, open market operations, subsidised provision of essential food items and trade policy measures, helped mitigate food inflation to a great extent. The expectation of a normal monsoon and moderating global prices of key imported items give credence to the benign and range-bound inflation projections for India made by the Reserve Bank of India and the International Monetary Fund. Beyond this, the medium to long-term inflation outlook will be shaped by the strengthening of price monitoring mechanisms and market intelligence as well as focussed efforts to increase the  domestic production of essential food items like pulses and edible oils for which India has a great degree of import dependence.