# Pension Sector

## Pension Sector

## India's Pension Sector demonstrated remarkable performance during the Covid-19

4.62  The framework of the pension system has evolved globally. In advanced countries, the pension sector is substantial, partly stemming from a large share of formal salaried employment. While the state provides some basic pension, it is only sometimes funded and thus is a pay-asyou-go scheme relying on current government revenue for pension payments. In 2021, pension assets in OECD countries 14 stood at US$ 38.5 trillion, 66.9 per cent of the GDP. In some of the OECD countries, pension assets were over 100 per cent of the GDP. The United States recorded the largest holdings in pension funds, followed by the United Kingdom and Australia. During Covid-19, countries undertook unprecedented and swift health and pension-related reforms 15 to address health challenges, limit the impact of the crisis on labour markets, support incomes and adjust macroeconomic policies.

4.63  In  addition,  countries  took  other  measures  to  minimise  the  impact  of  Covid-19  on  the marginalised, poor and vulnerable sections such as subsidising wages and pension entitlements through  Job  Retention  Scheme  (JRS),  broadening  the  access  to  unemployment  benefits,  or grant of unemployment insurance to new groups of workers. The United States expanded the coverage of unemployment benefits to the self-employed and Finland broadened the coverage of the already existing scheme for the self-employed. Chile permanently expanded the coverage of unemployment insurance to workers. New Zealand introduced a temporary benefit paid for up to three months to employees who lost their jobs and to the self-employed who stopped their activity.

4.64  The Government of India announced various measures to provide pensions to families who have lost their earning members due to Covid. It also took initiatives towards enhancing and liberalising insurance compensation. The benefit of the Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) pension scheme was extended to even those who have lost earning members due to Covid-19. Dependent family members of such persons were entitled to a pension equivalent to 90 per cent of the average daily wage drawn by the worker as per the existing norms. The insurance benefits under the Employees Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) scheme were also enhanced and liberalised.

4.65  Ex-gratia of ₹1,000 was giv en to around three crore poor senior citizens, widows, and disabled sections of the population (aged above 60 years) for three months during April-June 2020. Rule 64 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, was relaxed to ensure immediate provisional sanction of pensionary benefits amid the unprecedented pandemic. To enhance the 'Ease of

Living' of Central Government Civil Pensioners, an Electronic Pension Payment order (e-PPO) was integrated with Digi Locker, creating a permanent PPO record in the Digi Locker. The timeline for submitting Life Certificate was relaxed, along with providing a doorstep facility to pensioners for submission of the life certificate digitally.

4.66  The Government of India is implementing various pension schemes such as the Indira Gandhi  National  Old  Age  Pension  Scheme  (IGNOAPS),  Indira  Gandhi  National  Widow Pension  Scheme  (IGNWPS),  Indira  Gandhi  National  Disability  Pension  Scheme  (IGNDPS) under the National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) with a total beneficiary coverage of 4.7 crore. The National Pension System (NPS) was introduced in January 2004, the primary pension system for government employees with a pay-as-you-go defined benefit plan. NPS for government employees is a defined contribution plan with co-contribution from the government. The value of the pension corpus is marked-to-market, and accordingly, the rate of return is market determined. NPS was extended to all the citizens of the country in the age group of 18-70 years, including the unorganised sector workers (on a voluntary basis) in 2009. In order to ensure that an avenue for savings is available to all sections of society, PFRDA launched 'NPS-Corporate Sector Model' in 2011 to provide NPS to the employees of corporate entities, including PSUs.

4.67  The Government introduced APY in June 2015 as a part of the overarching objective of providing universal social security. The scheme applies to all individuals aged 18-40 years, with  an  emphasis  on  underprivileged,  unorganised,  and  low-income  individuals.  Since  the introduction of NPS and, more recently, APY, India's pension sector has expanded. The total number of subscribers under the NPS and APY registered a YoY growth of 25.1 per cent in November 2022, with AuM witnessing a growth of 22.7 per cent during the same period. The overall contribution recorded an increase of 27.6 per cent in November 2022, with maximum growth registered by the All-Citizen model followed by the Corporate Sector.

table iV.17: Performance of india's Pension Sector

|                       | no. of Subscribers   | no. of Subscribers   | yoy      | contribution (₹ Crore)   | contribution (₹ Crore)   | yoy      | aUM (₹ Crore)   | aUM (₹ Crore)   | yoy      |
|-----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------|-----------------|-----------------|----------|
|                       | Nov- 21              | Nov- 22              | per cent | Nov-21                   | Nov-22                   | per cent | Nov-21          | Nov-22          | per cent |
| CG+SG                 | 77                   | 83                   | 8        | 3,93,690                 | 4,89,855                 | 24       | 5,55,932        | 6,67,255        | 20       |
| Corporate+All Citizen | 32                   | 42                   | 31       | 8,41,80                  | 1,19,817                 | 42       | 1,07,554        | 1,46,705        | 36       |
| APY                   | 325                  | 429                  | 32       | 16,877                   | 22,437                   | 33       | 19,352          | 24,829          | 28       |

Source: PFRDA

Note: CG stands for Central Government and SG for State Government

4.68  A  survey  by  PFRDA 16 on  the  socio-economic  characteristics  of  NPS  subscribers  (all citizen models) for the five-year period FY17 to FY21 showed that 24 per cent were female subscribers, with the balance 76 per cent being male subscribers. This contrasts with a better gender balance in the case of APY. Female subscribers under APY have increased from nearly

16 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2170

38 per cent in the initial years of the scheme to around 44 per cent by March 2021 17 . Among various states, enrolment from Maharashtra was the highest, accounting for 17 per cent. The age profile of the subscribers in the APY scheme suggests increasing enrolments at younger age. As of August 2022, 44.8 per cent subscribers were between 18 and 25 years, as compared to 29.3 per cent as on March 2016 18 . Further, more people are now opting for a pension amount of ₹1000 per month. As of March 2022, around 76 per cent of subscribers have opted for ₹1000 per month pension amount, as compared to 38 per cent of subscribers as on March 2016. However, the number of subscribers opting for ₹5000 per month pension has declined from 47 per cent as of March 2016 to 15 per cent as of March 2022. The coverage of the population in pension under NPS and APY as a share of the total population has raised from 1.2 per cent to 3.7 per cent during the six years FY17 to FY22. Assets as a proportion of GDP have increased from 1.2 per cent to 3.2 per cent, reflecting that the pension sector is progressing much faster than the nominal growth of the economy and population.

- 4.69  PFRDA  has  undertaken  various  measures  to  ease  the  accessibility  of  NPS  and  APY to  subscribers,  such  as  reducing  timelines  for  processing  settlements  to  T+2  days.  Central Recordkeeping Agencies have integrated their systems with DigiLocker to provide Subscriber Centric Services such as electronic-Pension Retirement Account Number (e-PRAN), electronic Account statements, and Aadhar &amp; DigiLocker-based account openings. Government sector subscribers can change their investment choices online by submitting the request directly in the CRA login. The contributions through the UPI handle can be accepted for the benefit of NPS subscribers, permitting them to remit funds into their PRAN via the Virtual account number provided by CRA.
- 4.70  There is tremendous scope for growth in India's pension sector as per capita income is expected to rise further as the economy transitions to a high-middle-income country. India's demographic structure, with a more significant proportion of younger people, favours a phase of accumulation. However, financial literacy is a significant challenge not only in emerging market economies but also in advanced economies. PFRDA, under the aegis of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC), has taken several steps to enhance financial education so that consumers can make informed decisions and reap the benefit of the formal financial sector while being cognizant of risks and various trade-offs involved. These include pension education through  print  and  electronic  media,  outreach  programs  through  trade  bodies,  intermediaries such as banks, and town hall events.
- 4.71  India's pension sector provides a flexible mode of old age income-security for salaried employees and the common person. In the recent five years, FY18 to FY22, the number of subscribers has multiplied over three-fold, led by APY, and AUM by over four-fold, led by NPS. The future expansion in NPS is expected to emanate from the private sector, both the salaried and self-employed. Steps towards enhanced pension literacy, both of the subscribers and the intermediaries, coupled with a nudge from the regulator and the government, along with encouragement to young adults to join a pension scheme, would accelerate the movement towards a pensioned society.

17 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2307

18 https://www.pfrda.org.in/myauth/admin/showimg.cshtml?ID=2296