# Outlook

## Outlook

4.72  The resilience of the domestic financial system is reflected in the healthy balance sheet of banks, stronger capital levels of NBFCs and robust growth in the AuM of domestic mutual funds. Buoyant demand for bank credit and early signs of a revival in the investment cycle are benefiting from improving asset quality, a return to profitability and resilient capital and liquidity buffers. Further, IBC mechanism continues to support the 'Ease of Doing Business' in India by facilitating easy exit with time bound resolutions for firms. These strengths are helping the financial system absorb external spillovers, tightening global financial conditions and high volatility in financial markets.

4.73  India  is  one  of  the  fastest-growing  insurance  markets  in  the  world  and  is  expected  to emerge  as  one  of  the  top  six  insurance  markets  by  2032.  Digitisation  of  India's  insurance market, accompanied by an increase in FDI limit for insurance companies, is likely to facilitate an increased flow of long-term capital, a global technology, processes, and international best practices,  which  will  support  the  growth  of  India's  insurance  sector. Also,  as  we  transition to  a  high  middle-income economy, India's pension sector has tremendous scope for growth. Government initiatives towards enhancing pension literacy of subscribers and intermediaries, and a nudge from the regulator and the government to encourage young adults to join the pension scheme would play a significant role in enhancing pension availability to a more extensive section of society.