# Introduction

## INTRODUCTION

- 4.1 Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the global economy has been buffeted by several shocks - the Russia-Ukraine conflict, developments in the Middle East and the Red Sea crisis, leading to  supply  dislocations  in  several  commodities  and  a  considerable  rise  in  inflation  in  many countries. Moreover, citizens of about 64 countries (plus the European Union), about 49 per cent  of  the  world  population,  will  exercise  their  franchise  in  2024.  This  adds  to  the  policy uncertainty confronting the global economy, especially in the context of international trade and immigration policies. Foreign investments, which drive international trade and commerce, have slowed down recently due to these uncertainties, higher interest rates in the developed world, and the pursuit of active industrial policies by developed countries. For example, the Inflation Reduction Act of the United States of America not only incentivised investment capital to stay at home but also lured capital from elsewhere. 1
- 4.2 As per the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 2 , global foreign direct investment (FDI) decreased marginally by 2 per cent to USD 1.3 trillion in 2023 from USD 1.4 trillion in 2022. Global trade, too, has been on a slow path, with the value of world merchandise trade declining by 5 per cent in 2023. External debt as a percentage of GDP of Emerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) increased from 26.2 per cent in 2012 to 29.8 per cent in 2023. After witnessing a deficit in their current account balance in 2022, Advanced Economies (AEs) saw a surplus in 2023. For EMDEs, the current account balance has been in surplus in 2022 and 2023, albeit a moderation from 1.5 per cent of the GDP in 2022 to 0.6 per cent of GDP in 2023. 3
- 4.3 Against this backdrop, the chapter deals with India's performance on external sectorrelated  parameters.  Section  1  discusses  prevailing  global  trade  dynamics  and  the  impact  of ongoing  geopolitical  headwinds  on  trade.  Section  2  focuses  on  India's  international  trade sector, presenting some specific case studies on industries that have shown remarkable export performances while also dwelling on the general trends. It also presents the outcomes of some of India's latest Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). The section further presents some analytical understanding of the exposure of our exports to imports from various countries and the need for  preparedness in the wake of any external unforeseen supply shocks. Section 3 presents in some detail the trends in capital flows into the country and draws some insights from the trends. Section 4 presents the country's balance of payments (BoP) situation, comparing it with some peer countries. It also presents the position of our foreign exchange reserves (FER) and international investment position (IIP), which buffer the economy from an uncertain external environment  turning  adverse.  Section  5  dwells  on  India's  external  debt  trends  and  how  it has been deftly managed. Section 6 concludes with the outlook for the external sector while mentioning the key challenges to tackle.

1   'How the US Mopped Up a Third of Global Capital Flows Since Covid', Bloomberg, 16 June 2024 (https://tinyurl.com/39y8kt85 - accessed 22 June 2024)

2   UNCTAD World Investment Report 2024-Investment Facilitation and Digital Government; https://tinyurl.com/3ycsh79c

3  As per the IMF World Economic Outlook Database