# Introduction

## INTRODUCTION

11.1 India's services sector encompasses a wide array of economic activities, which can be broadly classified  into  two  categories:  contact-intensive  and  non-contact-intensive  services. The former includes trade, hospitality, transport, real estate, social, community and personal services. The latter comprises financial, information technology, professional, communication, broadcasting,  and  storage  services.  The  sector  also  incorporates  public  administration  and defence services.

11.2 The services sector continues to be a significant contributor to India's growth, accounting for about 55 per cent of the total size of the economy in FY24. Several demand and supply side factors  determine  the  performance  of  the  services  sector.  The  significant  domestic  demand for services such as education, healthcare, finance, tourism, hospitality, and entertainment is underpinned by a large and young population. Rapid urbanisation supports transportation, housing, sanitation, and utility services. The expansion of e-commerce platforms has generated heightened  requirements  for  logistics,  digital  payments,  and  related  services.  Information technology and business services will likely retain their prominent international presence in the medium term. However, studies suggest that the application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is likely to restrain the growth opportunities for business services progressively and, therefore, poses a challenge to long-term sustainability and job creation. Thus, focusing on human capital

to take advantage of the agglomeration effects of large, well-functioning cities is critical for the growth of services, especially those with global market potential. 1

11.3 The Government has played a crucial role in fostering the growth and competitiveness of India's services sector by creating an enabling environment, promoting investment, enhancing skills,  and  facilitating  market  access.  For  instance,  the  Digital  India  campaign  has  fostered growth  in  digital  services,  export  promotion  schemes  have  encouraged  services  exports, infrastructure development has boosted logistics, tourism, and hospitality industry, and skill development initiatives have provided increased opportunities for the workforce. Furthermore, targeted  efforts  in  healthcare  and  tourism  have  enhanced  accessibility  and  development, ensuring a promising future for India's services sector.

11.4 The  remaining  sections  of  the  chapter  are  organised  with  the  emerging  services landscape in the country as outlined above in view. The following section provides an overview of the performance of the services sectors in terms of domestic output and international trade activity, followed by a section on financial flows into the services sector. This is followed by a deep dive into the performance of various services sub-sectors and related policy initiatives. It may be noted that the developments in important social services like education and health are dealt with in Chapter 7 of this Survey. The last two sections highlight the challenges and opportunities in the services sector and concludes with a future outlook.