# Introduction

## INTRODUCTION

10.1  India's  ambition  to  achieve  developed  nation  status  by  2047  is  fundamentally anchored in the vision of inclusive and sustainable development. Notably, India's per capita carbon emissions are one-third of the global average, even as it stands among the world's fastest-growing economies. The country is dedicated to identifying and exploring pathways for low-carbon development that simultaneously ensure affordable energy security, job creation, economic growth, and environmental sustainability. However, India's  aspiration  for  low-carbon  economic  growth  presents  significant  trade-offs. While the nation has made remarkable progress in building renewable energy capacity, effectively harnessing and scaling these resources remains challenging due to the lack of viable storage technologies and limited access to essential minerals.

10.2   A  strong  adaptation  strategy  is  a  priority  for  the  country,  given  its  significant vulnerability  to  climate  change,  stemming  from  its  geographic  and  agro-climatic diversity. 1  India's Initial Adaptation Communication, submitted to the United Nations

1   Khanna, P. (2024, December 29). India is overlooking the climate drag on its economic growth. Financial Times. Retrieved January 4, 2025, from https://tinyurl.com/cbkc3hjx.

Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  in  December  2023,  reveals that the total expenditure related to adaptation in FY22 was 5.6 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), an increase from 3.7 per cent in FY16. Climate action, so far, has been financed through domestic resources, with the public sector playing a central role. On the other hand, the international flow of funds for climate actions is highly inadequate and has a mitigation bias (Chart 1).

10.3 Following a low-carbon development pathway and achieving the net zero carbon emissions  goal  necessitates  a  fundamental  shift  in  mindset  and  behaviour  towards mindful consumption and production. The India-led global movement, Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE), aims to enhance the country's sustainability efforts. The LiFE initiatives  are  being  executed  in  India  in  mission  mode  through  various  regulatory measures and policies that encourage environmentally friendly practices such as waste management, resource conservation, and recycling. Promoting a circular economy is also envisioned as a central component under the Mission LiFE.

10.4 The recent outcome of the New Collective Quantified Goal at CoP29 (29th session of the annual climate conference under the UNFCCC) held in Baku in November 2024 on  finance  presents  little  optimism  about  the  possibility  of  support  to  developing countries. With  the  developed  countries  also falling short of their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) by about 38 per cent, 2  their actions do not reflect the historical responsibility or the leadership in meeting their obligations. The lack of commitment and insufficient delivery of the means of implementation, 3  as mandated in the Paris Agreement, will make the low-carbon transition in developing countries more challenging.

<!-- image -->

Source:  Based  on  the  Sixth  Biennial  Assessment  and  Overview  of  Climate  Finance  Flows  by  the  Standing Committee of Finance, UNFCCC. The flow of finance to cross-cutting actions has not been included here. The report can be accessed at https://tinyurl.com/52md2zht.

2  CEEW  (October  26,  2023).  Trust  and  Transparency  in  Climate  Action.  Retrieved  December  23,  2024,  from https://www.ceew.in/publications/trust-and-transparency-climate-action-research.

3  Finance, Technology and Capacity Building are regarded as the means of implementation.

10.5 The 29th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 29) and the 6th Session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA 6), held in Baku, Azerbaijan, were designated as the 'Finance COP'. The focus was to establish the New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG) on climate finance. 4  The meetings of COP29 and CMA6 presented a significant opportunity to serve as a benchmark for international climate cooperation and multilateralism, with the potential to influence the efficacy of climate policies on a global scale and strengthen collaborative efforts by enhancing the financial commitments to support climate action in developing countries.

10.6 Establishing a small mobilisation target of USD 300 billion annually by 2035 is a fraction of the estimated requirement of USD 5.1 - 6.8 trillion by 2030. 5 It is out of sync with the needs of the critical decade when action is required to keep the temperature goals  of  the  Paris  Agreement  within  reach. 6 The  decision  demonstrates  a  significant misalignment with the Paris Agreement's mandate to demonstrate a 'progression beyond previous  efforts'  by  developed  countries.  It  underscores  the  unwillingness  of  affluent developed nations to assume their equitable share of the responsibility to address emission reduction and mitigate climate change impacts on vulnerable populations in developing regions. The goal contravenes equity and the principle of common but differentiated responsibility in the global climate response by disproportionately placing the burdens of climate change on those nations that have not historically contributed to the crisis.

10.7 COP 30 in 2025 is the COP for Climate Action, before which the parties to the Paris Agreement are to submit their next version of Nationally Determined Contributions. The  funding  shortfall  may  lead  to  a  reworking  of  the  climate  targets.  Considering that domestic resources will be the key to action, resources for meeting development challenges  may  be  affected,  undermining  progress  toward  sustainable  development objectives and compromising the integrity of international climate partnerships.

10.8 This  chapter  is  structured  into  three  broad  parts.  It  starts  with  discussing  the importance of adaptation for India and the measures taken, focuses on energy transition and  the  lessons  learnt  from  the  experience  of  the  developed  countries  and  weighs options for India. It ends with an overview of the Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) initiative and measures encouraging sustainable practices and circular economy.

4  Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement. (2024). New collective quantified goal on climate finance. In Decision -/CMA.6. Retrieved December 11, 2024, from https://tinyurl. com/45x593ce.

5  UNFCCC Standing Committee on Finance. (2024). Second report on the determination of the needs of developing country  Parties  related  to  implementing  the  Convention  and  the  Paris  Agreement.  In  UNFCCC.  Retrieved December 23,  2024, from https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/UNFCCC\_NDR2\_ES\_Web\_Final.pdf.

6  United Nations. (2024). Outcome of the first global stocktake Decision 1/CMA.5 in the Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on its fifth session. In Addendum (FCCC/ PA/CMA/2023/16/Add.1). UNFCCC. Retrieved December 23, 2024, from https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/ resource/cma2023\_16a01E.pdf.