# Key Areas of Policy Focus in the Short to Medium Term

## KEY AREAS OF POLICY FOCUS IN THE SHORT TO MEDIUM TERM

- 5.12.  Based on the state of the play of the Indian economy, both at a macro level and sectoral level, that has been elaborated in the rest of the chapters of this Survey, the present section draws out some of the key areas of policy focus to ensure that India's growth continues unimpeded, crossing the milestone of becoming the third largest economy of the world in short order, on its way to scaling greater heights.
- 5.13. Generating  productive  employment: Productive  jobs  are  vital  for  growth  and inclusion. India's workforce is estimated to be nearly 56.5 Crore, of which more than 45 per cent are employed in agriculture, 11.4 per cent in manufacturing, 28.9 per cent in services, and 13.0 per cent in construction 2 . While the services sector remains a major job creator, the construction  sector  has  been  rising  in  prominence  lately,  driven  by  the  government's  push for infrastructure. However, since construction jobs are largely informal and low-paid, there is a need for avenues for the labour force leaving agriculture. Meanwhile, the manufacturing sector  employment creation has been subdued in the past decade due to the legacy of bad loans and appears to have rebounded since 2021-22. According to UN population projections, India's working-age population (15-59 years) will continue to grow until 2044. The chapter on Employment (chapter 8) estimates that the Indian economy needs to generate nearly 78.51 lakh jobs annually in the non-farm sector to cater to the rising workforce. However, to create these many jobs, there is a need to create the conditions for faster growth of productive jobs outside of  agriculture,  especially  in  organized  manufacturing  and  services,  even  while  improving productivity in agriculture.
- 5.14. Skill gap challenge: Sixty-five per cent of India's fast-growing population is under 35, and many lack the skills needed by a modern economy 3 . Estimates show that about 51.25 per cent of the youth is deemed employable. In other words, about one in two are not yet readily employable, straight out of college. However, it must be noted that the percentage has improved from around 34 per cent to 51.3 per cent in the last decade 4 . The 2022-23 Annual Report of

2    Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

3  Helping India build a skilled, inclusive, workforce for the future, World Bank, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/2tp4xpab)

4    Bardhan,  A  and  Routh,  V.  (2024).  Tackling  India's  unemployment  problem:  Services,  skills  and  symmetry, Observer Research Foundation, (https://tinyurl.com/3uudbkms)

the Ministry of Skill Development &amp; Entrepreneurship (MSDE) highlights that 'as per NSSO, 2011-12 (68th round) report on Status of Education and Vocational Training in India, among persons of age 15-59 years, about 2.2 per cent reported to have received formal vocational training  and  8.6  per  cent  reported  to  have  received  non-formal  vocational  training'.  The Annual Report further goes on enumerate the challenges in the skilling and entrepreneurship landscape in the country, such as ': (i) Public perception that views skilling as the last option meant for those who have not been able to progress/have opted out of the formal academic system. (ii) Skill development programmes of the Central Government are spread across more than 20 Ministries/Departments without any robust coordination and monitoring mechanism to ensure convergence. (iii) Multiplicity in assessment and certification systems that leads to inconsistent  outcomes and causes confusion among the employers. (iv) Paucity of trainers, inability to attract practitioners from industry as faculty. (v) Mismatch between demand and supply at the sectoral and spatial levels. (vi) Limited mobility between skill and higher education programmes and vocational education. (vii) Very low coverage of apprenticeship programmes. (viii) Narrow and often obsolete skill curricula. (ix) Declining labour force participation rate of women. (x) Pre-dominant non-farm, unorganized sector employment with low productivity but no premium for skilling. (xi) Non- inclusion of entrepreneurship in formal education system. (xii) Lack of mentorship and adequate access to finance for start-ups. (xiii) Inadequate impetus to innovation driven entrepreneurship. (xiv) Lack of assured wage premium for skilled people'. The Chapter on employment (chapter 8)  provides a detailed analysis of the skill gap challenge and the efforts underway to address the same.

5.15. Tapping  the  full  potential  of  the  agriculture  sector: Despite  its  centrality  in India's growth trajectory, the agriculture sector continues to face structural issues that have implications for India's economic growth. The foremost concern confronting the sector pertains to sustaining agriculture growth without letting food price inflation rise beyond acceptable limits while incentivising farmers to raise production. 5 There is also a need to improve price discovery mechanisms  for  agriculture  products,  increase  efficiency,  reduce  disguised  unemployment, address the fragmentation of landholding, and increase crop diversification, among a host of other issues. All of these call for the upgradation of agricultural technology, the application of modern skills in farm practices, enhancing agricultural marketing avenues, price stabilisation, the adoption of innovation in farming, lowering wastages in the use of fertiliser, water, and other  inputs,  and  improving  the  agriculture-industry  linkages.  The  chapter  on  agriculture (Chapter 9) discusses the policies being pursued by the Government to enable agriculture to tap its full potential.

5.16. Easing the compliance requirements and financing bottlenecks confronting MSMEs: MSMEs have played a key role in defining the economic trajectory of some of the major economies, such as Germany, Switzerland, Canada, China, etc. In India, the Government has been paying focused attention to enabling the MSME sector to occupy the centre stage in  India's  economic  story.  However,  the  sector  continues  to  face  extensive  regulation  and compliance requirements and faces significant bottlenecks with access to affordable and timely funding being one of the core concerns. Licensing, Inspection, and Compliance requirements

5     Chand, R. (2019). Transforming Agriculture for the challenges of the 21st Century, 102 Annual Conference Indian Economic Association (IEA) (https://tinyurl.com/4dpu7f9e)

that MSMEs have to deal with, imposed particularly by sub-national governments, hold them back from growing to their potential and being job creators of substance. Threshold-based concessions and exemptions create the unintended effect of incentivising enterprises to cap their  sizes  below  the  thresholds.  Therefore,  threshold-based  incentives  must  have  sunset clauses.  Further,  many  MSMEs  struggle  to  secure  the  necessary  funds  to  start,  operate,  or expand their business due to a variety of reasons including lack of collateral or credit history, high interest rates, complex documentation requirements, and long processing times, etc. The Lok Sabha Standing Committee on Finance, in its April 2022 report on 'Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME, noted that the credit gap in the MSME sector is estimated to be around Rs 20-25 lakh crore. The government has launched several schemes, such as the Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana and the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises, aimed at providing affordable credit to MSMEs. The initiatives have shown considerable promise in addressing these challenges. The Chapter on Industry (Chapter 10) discusses these issues in detail.

5.17. Managing India's green transition: India has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 33-35 per cent (from 2005 levels), increasing the share of non-fossil fuel-based electricity to 40 per cent and enhancing forest cover to absorb 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide by 2030 6 . However, the path of green transition in India needs to (a) ensure the consistency of the E-Mobility policy with the required and optimal energy mix between traditional and renewable source; (b) ensure grid stability for E-Mobility to become pervasive; (c) develop or acquire storage technology at affordable costs for the share of renewable energy in power generation to rise; (d) reckon with the opportunity cost of land and capital being used for renewable energy given that India's needs for land and capital far exceed their availability; (e) decide on the role and the share of nuclear energy in the energy mix;  (f) recognise and deal with challenges posed by dependence on China for critical minerals, which are crucial raw materials needed for E-Mobility and renewable energy generation; (g) examine the implications of phasing down coal for bank balance sheets; (h) recognise and estimate the impact of phasing out of coal-fired thermal plants on the freight revenues of the Indian Railways and (i) study implications of replacing internal combustion engine vehicles with e-vehicles particularly on the sale of petrol and diesel and the tax revenues that such sale generates for the Union and State governments. Last but not least, India not only has to deal with climate change and undertake energy transition but also deal with the protectionism of the developed countries. Europe is on course to implement its Carbon Border Adjustment Tax and both the United Kingdom and the United States are in different stages of imposing their versions of it in due course. These taxes are in contravention to the spirit of the Paris Agreement that recognised 'Common But Differentiated Responsibilities'.

5.18.  Further,  the  overarching  climate  actions  to  achieve  Intended  Nationally  Determined Contributions (INDC) goals require massive financial resources. Preliminary estimates indicate that the aggregate investment support required by India to achieve its 2070 net-zero target will

6    These goals are articulated in the government's Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Conference of Parties (COP 21) in Paris in 2015.

be USD 1.4 trillion at an average of USD 28 billion per year 7 . Raising financial resources for climate change adaptation and mitigation actions of this scale is an unprecedented challenge, especially given that India's climate action has been largely financed through domestic resources and the flow of international finance has been very limited. As per the Reserve Bank of India, bridging this substantial funding gap necessitates allocating 2.5 per cent of India's annual GDP to green finance. A 2022 report by the Climate Policy Initiative 8  found that domestic sources accounted for the majority of green finance in India, at 87 per cent and 83 per cent in fiscal years 2019 and 2020, respectively. While international sources are increasing (from 13 per cent in FY 2019 to 17 per cent in FY 2020), they are still insufficient to meet India's net-zero target 9 . Mobilising  substantial  capital  from  traditional  sources  presents  multifaceted  challenges  in emerging economies like India. The perceived sovereign risks associated with EMDEs and the capital-intensive nature of such projects, coupled with lengthy gestation periods and evolving regulatory  frameworks, can create misalignment between investor expectations and project timelines. It is also pertinent to note that the flows of global capital to developing countries have been impeded by high costs of capital. Despite securing a good rating on its green bond framework, Indian sovereign green bonds have hardly received any 'greenium' 10   from private investors. It is more a 'wall of capital' than a 'flood of capital' that is waiting to fund energy transition in EMDEs. It just isn't mobile. All of these together have severely hampered the flow of finance for green transition projects. The issues related to climate finance and India's green transition are discussed in detail in the chapter on Climate Change and Energy (chapter 6).

5.19. The Chinese conundrum: The dynamics of India-China economic relations continue to be extremely complex and intertwined. The Chinese domination over the global supply chains across product categories is a key global concern, especially in the wake of supply disruption accompanying the war in Ukraine. Even though India is the fastest-growing G20 country and is now recording growth rates that outpace China's, India's economy is still a fraction of China's. In the context of energy transition, China's near-monopoly over the production and processing of critical and rare earth minerals has already been a cause of global concern. It will also have significant repercussions for India's renewable energy programme, which is vulnerable because of its massive dependence on imported raw materials 11 . Against this background, it may not be the most prudent approach to think that India can take up the slack from China vacating certain  spaces  in  manufacturing.  Indeed,  recent  data  cast  doubt  on  whether  China  is  even vacating light manufacturing. The questions that India faces are: (a) Is it possible to plug India into the global supply chain without plugging itself into the China supply chain? and (b) what is the right balance between importing goods and importing capital from China?  As countries attempt to reshore and friendshore, India's policy choices concerning China are exacting.

7     Singh, V and Sidhu, G. (2021). Investment sizing India's net zero target, Council on energy, Environment and Water (https://tinyurl.com/yfz6wzdw)

8   Landscape of green finance in India, Climate Policy Initiative, 2022 (https://tinyurl.com/3p74wnb7)

9     Report  on  Transition  Finance  by  the  Expert  Committee  on  Climate Finance,  International  Financial  Services Centres Authority, 2024  (https://tinyurl.com/465yxd63)

10    The 'greenium', or green premium, refers to pricing benefits based on the logic that investors are willing to pay extra or accept lower yields in exchange for sustainable impact. Source - UNDP, 2022 (https://tinyurl.com/ yks7cyr7)

11    How renewables are shaping the India-China relationship, Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, 2023 (https:// tinyurl.com/3u6rav84)

## Box V.I: The Chinese Manufacturing Juggernaut: A Threat to EMEs 12

It  is  increasingly  seen  that  emerging  economies  are  introducing  import  restrictions  on Chinese goods while accelerating a push for free trade elsewhere to protect their domestic manufacturers.

These protectionist measures directed against Chinese products are emerging due to the threat that the overcapacity in China's manufacturing sector is posing to other countries, especially in the EMDEs. China's manufacturing trade surplus has been ballooning since 2019  due  to  weak  domestic  demand  and  expanding  industrial  capacity.  The  mismatch between domestic supply and demand in China has widened in the past few years, leading to  Chinese  companies  exploring  additional  markets  overseas.  This  is  leading  to  prices collapsing  globally  and  driving  other  national  producers  out  of  business,  especially  in product categories where China dominates. For instance, the poor performance of China's property sector since 2021 created significant overcapacity leading to a collapse in global steel prices, which now puts significant pressure on producers in India, Vietnam, Brazil, and other countries. Estimates show that China's steel product exports are surging again-by 27 per cent so far in 2024-after 35 per cent growth last year.

China's dominance over a large number of product categories creates a risk of economic coercion,  where  the  government  restrains  access  to  crucial  inputs  for  political  leverage. This is most evident in the case of the export of rare earth and critical minerals which are of  high  priority  in  the  green  transition  efforts  of  countries.  China's  dominance  also  has led  to  monopolistic  practices  which  has  considerably  limited  the  space  for  new  entrants to  emerge  as  new  manufacturing  powers.  Recent  research  by  Rhodium  Group  observes that 'The Chinese government can encourage companies to partner together, merge and consolidate, coordinate to gain market shares, raise prices, restrict access to products where they already have substantial market power, or favour domestic firms in their suppliers and client networks.'

It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  "while  China  still  needs  to  import  high-tech  products from rich industrialized economies, it imports very few low-tech goods, where developing countries would have a comparative advantage. This is largely a result of deliberate policy interventions, which have intensified in recent years."

All these above factors have together played a key role in constraining the manufacturing sector of EMDEs. While EMDEs are resorting to import restrictions as a policy option to deal with the Chinese challenge, it is pertinent to note that some Chinese goods are so cheap that  no  amount  of  tariff  can  reduce  their  price  competitiveness.  Further,  some  Chinese products can move past these restrictions without being noticed since they are packaged in third countries. Meanwhile, China has started retaliating against these import restrictions which has further complicated the manufacturing landscape for EMDEs. For instance, in

12    The contents of this Box is based on the article 'Brazil, India and Mexico are taking on China's exports' that appeared in The Economist issue dated May 23, 2024 and the research from Rhodium Group on 'How China's Overcapacity Holds Bank Emerging Economies' accessed at https://tinyurl.com/4kkdhctz

response  the  India's  anti-dumping  probe  against  Chinese  entities,  China  has  been quietly  blocking  India's  access  to  solar  equipment.  Given  this,  dealing  with  the  Chinese manufacturing juggernaut will test the policy mettle of EMDEs. Developing countries will have to figure out a way of meeting the import competition from China and, at the same time, boosting domestic manufacturing capabilities, sometimes with the collaboration of Chinese investment and technology.

As the Rhodium group research points out, Brazil and Turkey recently raised tariffs on the import of E-Vehicles from China but, at the same time, took steps to attract Chinese FDI in the sector.

India has a similar decision to make, given its large bilateral trade deficit with China. It makes India vulnerable to potential abrupt supply disruptions. Replacing some well-chosen imports with investments from China raises the prospect of creating domestic know-how down the road. It may have other risks, but as with many other matters, we don't live in a first-best world. We have to choose between second and third-best choices.

In sum, to boost Indian manufacturing and plug India into the global supply chain, it is inevitable that India plugs itself into China's supply chain. Whether we do so by relying solely  on  imports  or  partially  through  Chinese  investments  is  a  choice  that  India  has  to make.

5.20. Deepening  the  corporate  bond  market: Going  forward,  the  investment  needed to steer India's economic growth has to be through a multitude of financing options beyond bank financing. India needs both banks and capital markets to provide the required finances sourced from a sustained high level of household savings. An active corporate bond market becomes  critical  in  this  context.  An  efficient  corporate  bond  market  with  lower  costs  and quicker issuing time can offer an efficient and cost-effective source of longer-term funds for corporates. However, the size of the corporate bond market in India, scaled by GDP, remains small compared to other major Asian emerging markets such as Malaysia, Korea, and China. 13 The Indian corporate bond market lacks depth since it is dominated by highly-rated issuers and a limited investor base of domestic institutions.

5.21. Tackling inequality: Globally, widening inequality is emerging as a crucial economic challenge confronting policymakers. The 2022 State of Inequality in India report 14  observed that in India, the top 1 per cent accounts for 6-7 per cent of the total incomes earned, while the top 10 per cent accounts for one-third of total incomes earned. The Government places significant focus on this issue and all the critical policy interventions being undertaken with a focus on creating jobs, integrating the informal sector with the formal sector, and expanding the female labour force are aimed at effectively addressing inequality. Tax policies on the treatment of capital and labour incomes will likely play a more important role in the coming years, especially since the deployment of technology like AI may have a more deleterious impact on employment and income.

13  https://www.bis.org/review/r220824c.pdf

14  The State of inequality in India, Institute for Competitiveness, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/8ruecubn)

5.22. Improving the quality of health of India's young population: The Indian Council for Medical Research, in its latest Dietary Guidelines for Indians published in April 2024 15 , estimates that 56.4 per cent of the total disease burden in India is due to unhealthy diets. The report also goes on to observe that the upsurge in the consumption of highly processed foods laden with sugars and fat, coupled with reduced physical activity and limited access to diverse foods, exacerbate micronutrient deficiencies and overweight/obesity problems. Estimates show that the adult obesity rate in India has more than tripled, and the annual rise in children's is the steepest in the world for India, behind Vietnam and Namibia, according to the World Obesity Federation 16 .  The  National  Family  Health  Survey,  2019-2021  presents  a  very  penetrating portrait of the health status of India's population (Box V.2). If India needs to reap the gains of  its  demographic  dividend,  it  is  critical  that  its  population's  health  parameters  transition towards a balanced and diverse diet.

## Box V.2: India's expanding obesity challenge: Observations from National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5), 2019-2021

Obesity  is  emerging  as  a  serious  concern  among  India's  adult  population.  According  to National Family Health Survey 5 (NFHS-5), the percentage of men facing obesity in the age bracket 18-69 has increased to 22.9 per cent in NFHS-5 from 18.9 per cent in NFHS-4. For women, it has increased from 20.6% (NFHS-4) to 24.0% (NFHS-5). The spatial distribution of India's obesity challenge as per NFHS-5 vis-à-vis NFHS-4 reveals the following:

-  In Tamil Nadu, for men, it is 37.0% (vs. 28.2% in NFHS-4), and it is 40.4% for women (vs. 30.9% in NFHS-4).
-  In Uttar Pradesh, for women, it has gone up to 21.3% (NFHS-5) from 16.5% (NFHS-4), and for men, it has gone up to 18.5% (NFHS-5) from 12.5% (NFHS-4).
-  In Kerala, for women, it has gone up to 38.1% (NFHS-5) from 32.4% (NFHS-4), and for men, it has gone up to 36.4% (NFHS-5) from 28.5% (NFHS-4).
-  In West Bengal, for women, it has gone up to 22.7% (NFHS-5) from 19.9% (NFHS-4), and for men, it has gone up to 16.2% (NFHS-5) from 14.2% (NFHS-4).
-  In Karnataka, the increase over NFHS-4 is 7% points for women (30.1% vs. 23.3%) and nearly 9% points (30.9% vs. 22.1%) for men.
-  In  Andhra,  it  is  36.3%  for  women  (vs.  33.2%).  However,  for  men,  the  number  has dropped to 31.1% (vs. 33.5%).
-  At 30.1% and 32.3%, respectively, the proportion of women and men who are overweight in Telangana has increased from 28.6% for women to 24.2% for men in NFHS-4.
-  In Maharashtra, for women, it has remained the same across NFHS-4 and NFHS-5 at 23.4%, while for men, it has gone up to 24.7% (NFHS-5) from 23.8% (NFHS-4).

15  Dietary guidelines for Indians, ICMR- National institute of nutrition, 2024 (https://tinyurl.com/ts6xejc4)

16  Junk food's USD 30 Billion opening India's next health crisis, Bloomberg, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/52wtd7r9)

-  In Madhya Pradesh, for women, it has gone up to 16.6% (NFHS-5) from 13.6% (NFHS4), and for men, it has gone up to 15.6% (NFHS-5) from 10.9% (NFHS-4).
-  In Jharkhand, for women, it has gone up to 11.9% (NFHS-5) from 10.3% (NFHS-4), and for men, it has gone up to 15.1% (NFHS-5) from 11.1% (NFHS-4).
-  In Bihar, for women, it has gone up to 15.9% (NFHS-5) from 11.7% (NFHS-4), and for men, it has gone up to 14.7% (NFHS-5) from 12.6% (NFHS-4).
-  In the NCT (Delhi), the proportion of women with obesity is 41.3% (vs 33.5%), and for men, it is 38.0% (vs 24.6%).

At the All-India level, a quick perusal of the data shows that the incidence of obesity, as per NFHS5, is significantly higher in urban India than in rural India (29.8% vs. 19.3% for men and 33.2% vs. 19.7% for women). Combined with an ageing population in some states, obesity  presents  a  concerning  situation.  Preventive  measures  must  be  taken  to  enable citizens to have a healthier lifestyle. Here, it is pertinent to note that the NFHS-5 Survey overlapped with the Covid-19 pandemic. Therefore, with restrictions on outside activities and lockdowns, sedentary lifestyles may have become more entrenched, resulting in the obesity proportion going up much more in NFHS-5. If the trend reverses in NFHS-6, it will be a healthy sign.

## GROWTH STRATEGY FOR AMRIT KAAL : STRONG, SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE

5.23.  The policy reforms that the Government of India has been following over the past decade have laid the foundation for sustained moderate to high growth in the coming years. To sustain growth for nearly a generation up to 2047 or more and to ensure that it makes people's lives better and fulfills their aspirations, bottom-up reforms are necessary. This section presents a six-pronged growth strategy that can guide the bottom-up reform process going forward.

5.24. Strategy for boosting private sector investment: India's private gross fixed capital formation must accelerate in Machinery &amp; Equipment and Intellectual Property products so that quality jobs can be created. The focus of the Government should be on creating an enabling policy and regulatory environment for the upgradation of capacity and know-how of component manufacturers,  increasing  the  availability  of  trained  human  resources,  addressing  resource bottlenecks and regulatory impediments, etc. Capital formation in the private sector, after the consolidation in the second decade due to balance sheet issues, has begun to recover post-Covid. Nonetheless, there is significant scope for boosting India's private investment, especially in the context of investment requirements facing the Indian economy in the areas of infrastructure, green transition, etc. The Government of India has undertaken significant initiatives in this direction, which include Aatmanirbhar packages, the introduction of the Production Linked Incentive  (PLI),  investment  opportunities  under  the  National  Infrastructure  Pipeline  (NIP) and National Monetisation Pipeline (NMP), India Industrial Land Bank (IILB), Industrial Park

Rating System (IPRS), the soft launch of the National Single Window System (NSWS) 17 , etc. The focus needs to be on the implementation of these measures with a target of putting the Private  Sector  Non-Residential  Investment  (including  equipment,  structures,  software,  and R&amp;D) on a sustainable footing so that it can catalyse the efforts towards increasing investment to 35 per cent  of GDP.

5.25. Strategy for the growth and expansion of India's Mittelstand 18 : Strengthening India's MSME sector is central to India's growth in the coming years. MSMEs are the backbone of the Indian economy, contributing approximately 30 per cent of the country's GDP, 45 per cent of manufacturing output, and providing employment to 11 crore of India's population 19 . The  Government  of  India  has  been  proactive  in  boosting  the  growth  of  the  MSME  sector, through initiatives such as the allocation of 5 lakh crore Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) for businesses, including MSMEs; equity infusion of 50,000 crore through the  MSME  Self-Reliant  India  Fund;  New  revised  criteria  for  the  classification  of  MSMEs; rollout of Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance (RAMP) programme with an outlay of 6,000 crores over 5 years; Launch of Udyam Assist Platform (UAP) on 11.01.2023 to bring the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) under the formal ambit for availing the benefit under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) 20 . These initiatives have been formulated keeping in mind the key challenges the sector faces, primarily for access to timely and affordable credit. Important though it is, however, financing is only one of the key challenges that the sector faces.

5.26.  Going  forward,  for  the Mittelstand to  expand, deregulation  is  a  vital  policy contribution. That is why the revival or creation of institutional mechanisms for dialogue with states on required policy changes is essential. Much of the action has to happen at the level  of  sub-national  (state  and  local)  governments. Physical  and  digital  connectivity (industrial and freight corridors), infrastructure upgrade and development, the introduction of bullet trains, and the manufacture of semiconductor chips will contribute to  the  growth  of  the  sector  through  the  supply-chain  network  and  the  growth  of  ancillary industries that they catalyse, apart from the inspirational effects that projects such as building semiconductor fab and introducing a bullet train will have when they are operational. MSME entrepreneurs also need training in critical areas of enterprise management, such as human resource management, financial management, and technology. These interventions have to be targeted, tailored to the circumstances of each sector, and practical rather than academic. The productivity of owner-entrepreneurs unleashed by such training will be immense.

5.27.  Export strategy is also a crucial component of elevating the manufacturing share of GDP and growing the country's Mittelstand . For instance, 'Make in India Mittelstand (MIIM),' a  collaboration  between  India  and  Germany,  focuses  on  driving  innovation  and  enhancing economic cooperation by encouraging small and medium-sized German companies to invest

17  PIB press release of Ministry of Commerce &amp; Industry dated 9th Aug, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/yaxwv8xy)

18    Mittelstand commonly refers to a group of stable business enterprises in Germany, Austria and Switzerland that have proved successful in enduring economic change and turbulence. It is usually defined as a statistical category of small  and  medium-sized enterprises with annual revenues up to 50 million Euro and a maximum of 500 employees, (https://tinyurl.com/mrxkz5sm)

19  Invest India, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/56393ekz)

20    PIB press release of Ministry of Micro,Small &amp; Medium Enterprises dated 7th Aug, 2023 (https://tinyurl. com/4m465t7c)

and  manufacture  in  India.  Since  its  inception  in  September  2015,  the  MIIM  programme has  supported  more  than  151  German  Mittelstand  companies,  resulting  in  a  total  declared investment exceeding €1.4 Bn in India 21 , as of August 2021.  A majority of these investments came in the automotive, renewables, construction, consumer goods, electronics and electricals, chemical,  and  waste/  water  management  sectors.  Striking  the  right  balance  between  the trilemma of trade with China, investment by China, and India's territorial and non-territorial integrity and security is part of the strategy of growing India's Mittelstand.

5.28. Strategy for removing the growth impediments in the agricultural sector: The importance of the agriculture sector in the Indian economy and the impediments confronting the sector have been discussed in detail in the literature. Agriculture is at the nexus of three of the greatest challenges of the 21st century - sustaining food and nutrition security, adaptation and mitigation of climate change, and sustainable use of critical resources such as water, energy, and land. Agriculture and allied sectors such as horticulture, livestock, fisheries, and dairy and activities such as food processing hold significant potential for gainful employment. Given the geopolitical and technological threats that both manufacturing and service sectors face, it makes immense sense to do whatever it takes to realise the latent employment potential in agriculture. It is both urgent and important for India to re-imagine the contours of its primary sector for the next generation. India may have to abandon the old development playbook of moving on from agriculture to industry and services as economic development matures. Far from fading away with economic development as has happened with other countries in the past, in the changed geopolitical and evolving climatic circumstances, it may have a very important role to play in India's physical, food, and economic security.

## Box V.3: A farmer-friendly policy framework

The Indian agriculture sector is a success story. The country has come a long way from being a food deficit and importing country in the Sixties to being a net exporter of agricultural products. At the same time, it is important to recognise that India has a good scope to enhance value addition in agriculture and make employment in agri-value chains both remunerative and attractive among Indian youth. Unlike East Asian economies and developed countries of the West, India has yet to fully exploit the potential of agriculture to contribute to economic growth and employment generation.

Indian agriculture is not in a crisis now but requires a serious structural transformation because climate change and water criticality loom large in the times to come. The surge in  agricultural  employment  in  Covid  years  due  to  reverse  migration,  the  decline  in  the growth rate of value addition in agriculture in FY24, and an extremely hot summer in the Northwestern and central regions of the country in the summer of 2024 with rising water stress and energy consumption make a serious and honest stock-taking of India's farm sector policies imperative. If we grasp the nettle, then the chances of enhancing the contribution of the farm sector to national food and nutritional security, as well as economic prosperity in rural India, go up considerably. Higher and well-shared prosperity in the rural economy can

21    Invest India, 2024 (https://tinyurl.com/23nsxy4b)

help spur much-needed demand for industrial goods, thus spurring a manufacturing sector take-off. Thus, agriculture has a much higher multiplier effect on overall GDP than indicated by its direct contribution.

In a growing economy, the share of agriculture declines over time. That is normal. That is  considered  progress.  Households,  as  their  incomes  rise,  do  not  consume  more  food proportionately. The share of food in their consumption expenditure goes down, famously regarded as Engel's law. However, it does not mean that food is less consequential to their well-being. Within food, the expenditure on nutritious food (protein and vitamins) such as livestock products (milk and meat), fish, fruits, and vegetables goes up, which is in line with what is known as Benette's law.

Agriculture  and  farmers  matter  for  a  nation.  Most  countries  understand  that.  India  is no  exception.  India  subsidises  their  water,  electricity,  and  fertilisers.  The  former  two are  provided  virtually  free.  Their  incomes  are  not  taxed.  The  government  offers  them  a minimum support price (MSP) for 23 selected commodities. Monthly cash support is offered to farmers through the PM-KISAN scheme. In the past and in some cases, even now, Indian governments - national and sub-national - have waived their loans. So, governments in India spend enough resources to look after the farmers well. Yet, a case can be made that they can be served better with some re-orientation of existing and new policies.

Farm products are doubtless subject to the interplay of market forces. If anything, the relative inelasticity of food consumption works in their favour. This creates a conundrum. Prices rise when weather or other factors adversely impact the harvest. Farmers respond by increasing the area under cultivation for the next year, leading to a glut in supply, which drags down prices. On both occasions, farmers fail to reap any rewards - because of inadequate produce in the first instance and lower prices in the second.

Another risk for farmers is when output drops due to drought or drenching at harvest time. Prices rise, but the farmer is unable to benefit from the produce because it is inadequate. So,  farming  needs  insurance.  The  challenge  is  to  figure  out  the  best  forms  of  insurance and price support for farmers that do not distort incentives and create other costs for the economy,  such  as  excessive  water  consumption,  depletion  of  groundwater,  soil  quality erosion, and, equally, health costs through indirect encouragement of excess consumption of carbohydrates.

In theory, this insurance can come in the form of price support or income support. Price support interventions include direct price floors like the Minimum Support Price (MSP) or price-gap support like the Bhavantar Bhugtan Yojana that Madhya Pradesh experimented with in one season but gave up subsequently. Income support in the form of direct benefit transfers (DBT) like the PM KISAN is the preferred form of agriculture subsidy in many developed countries. Crop insurance, like the Prime Minister's Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY), is another form of income support, though it has a mixed record globally.

Given the vagaries of weather and the inherent difficulties of responding to prices promptly, there is an economic and moral case for farmers to be supported when market prices fail them. At the same time, farmers must have the freedom to benefit from market prices when market prices operate in their favour.

This often puts governments in the horns of a dilemma because, in relatively low-income countries,  the  interests  of  low-income  consumers  matter.  Therefore,  in  addition  to supporting farmers, governments are forced to intervene in the market to stabilise prices through  policies  like  open  market  sales,  trade  controls,  and  measures  against  hoarding and speculation. In India, these measures come on top of the massive Public Distribution System (PDS) that underpins food security for the vast majority of the population, especially the poor and vulnerable.

However, such price stabilisation measures aimed at consumers often conflict with incomesupport policies for the farmers. Governments have no option but to do a delicate balancing act. Here, the combination of policies becomes important. It is about a basket of policies that serve the interests of both farmers and consumers. There is a strong case here that both with farmers and consumers, income top-ups, i.e., direct cash transfers, are more effective. Direct transfers allow the markets to function.

How do we let the markets function in the interests of the farmer? What can governments do?

- (1)  By not banning futures or options markets at the first sign of price spikes.
2. These markets do not hurt consumers or farmers at all times. The bar for such bans must be set so high that their recourse must be almost non-existent. The intelligent regulatory design of such markets can obviate the need for bureaucratic interference in the futures market for agricultural commodities.
- (2)  By invoking export bans only under exceptional circumstances and allowing domestic consumers to substitute, especially if the agricultural commodities in question are  not  essential  consumption  items  such  as  foodgrains.  Even  in  those  cases,  the government can allow substitution effects to play out before responding to domestic supply concerns. For example, if sugar prices rise, consumers can consume less of it or switch to jaggery. It may even be a good thing for their health. In general, it is far easier for consumers to substitute or pare back consumption than for farmers to endure big losses because of ad hoc export bans or huge imports.
4. Farmers should be allowed to benefit from higher international prices. Bans on food exports also need to be telegraphed in advance lest hunger and famine elsewhere in the world worsen.
- (3)  By  re-examining the inflation-targeting framework. Food constitutes  a  very high portion of the consumer price index in developing countries. That is par for the course. Hence, when central banks in developing countries target headline inflation, they  effectively  target  food  prices.  So,  when  food  prices  rise,  inflation  targets  come under threat.  Therefore,  the  central  bank  appeals  to  the  government  to  bring  down the  increase  in  the  prices  of  food  products.  That  prevents  farmers  from  benefiting from the rise in terms of trade in their favour. India's inflation targeting framework should  consider  targeting  inflation,  excluding  food.  Higher  food  prices  are,  more often, not demand-induced but supply-induced. Short-run monetary policy tools are meant to counteract price pressures arising out of excess aggregate demand growth.

Deploying them  to deal with inflation caused by supply constraints  may  be counterproductive. Therefore, it is worth exploring whether India's inflation targeting framework should target the inflation rate excluding food. Hardships caused by higher food prices for poor and low-income consumers can be handled through direct benefit transfers or coupons for specified purchases valid for appropriate durations.

- (4)  Specifically, with reference to India, by increasing the Total Net Irrigated Area . Several states are well below the national average. Investment in irrigation may make monsoon-watching a non-event, but it would enhance farmers' income security. Not only that, as in the case of power generation plants where the plant load factor has scope for  improvement, India's irrigation efficiency can also improve. It is only 30-40 per cent for surface water and 50-60 per cent for groundwater. This calls for better water utilisation farming practices and technologies like drip and fertigation. It will help raise productivity and cut down water and fertiliser use by almost 50 per cent.
- (5)   Besides  these, by  making  farming  consistent  with  climate  considerations . India produces too much foodgrains and sugar, too few pulses, oil seeds, and other cash crops. Grains such as rice and sugarcane are water-guzzling crops. Water criticality is escalating in India. Further, among foodgrains, the cultivation of paddy gives rise to methane emissions. Its methane emission potential is considerable. Sometimes, and under some conditions, Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) or even organic farming for some crops could help save water and chemical fertilisers. It is also important to recognise that India has achieved relative self-sufficiency in basic staples and has emerged as the largest exporter of rice in the world (almost 40 per cent of world exports in 2022-23). Exporting 20 MT of rice means at least exporting 40 billion cubic meters of water. At home, the Food Corporation of India currently has rice stocks that are more than three times the buffer stock norm. Excessive production of rice results from large subsidies for power for irrigation, water, and fertilisers. The time has come to promote 'crop-neutral incentive structures.' That would imply that pulses, oilseeds, and millets that save on power, water, and fertilisers need to be rewarded with equivalent subsidies embedded in rice production.

Further, the need of the hour is to move from basic food security to nutritional security. We need more pulses, millet, fruits and vegetables, milk and meat for that. Importantly, their demand is growing much faster than that of basic staples. So, farm sector policies should align more with a 'demand-driven food system' that is more nutritious and aligned with Nature's resource endowments.

In sum, there is a need to take a holistic view of these diverse considerations, such that economic  policies,  in  general,  and  farm  policies,  in  particular,  benefit  farmers  and  are compatible with priorities related to health, water, and climate.

Given India's natural competitive advantages, agriculture and allied sectors have immense scope to contribute to employment and economic growth. Policies that enhance the economic viability of farming, ensure food and nutritional security, and place it on an economically, climatically, and environmentally sustainable footing will attract private sector investment

and pave the way for higher value addition by the sector while allowing public resources to be deployed in health, education, and skilling.

Hence, striving to achieve consensus with wide stakeholder consultations on the various issues in the sector is a multi-bagger in terms of the economic and social returns on the investment of effort.

5.29.  Strategy to secure the financing of green transition in India: Given the climate financing needs confronting India, there is a need to exploit the rapidly growing pool of global green capital from sovereign wealth funds, global pensions, private equity, and infrastructure funds. Ways to do so  include  addressing  barriers  to  investment  in  transition  projects,  fostering  a sustainable finance ecosystem, and diversifying funding sources. There is also the need for innovative and tailored approaches to effectively channel funds into green finance. For instance, blended finance, which strategically integrates public and private capital, holds the potential to  attract  private  sector  involvement,  mitigate  investment  risks,  and  enable  the  rapid  and scalable deployment of resources needed to successfully transition to a sustainable, low-carbon economy. Furthermore, as India shifts to low-carbon energy to meet its environmental goals, sector-specific financial institutions can also help to mobilize green funds. Their specialized knowledge of the sector (especially the hard-to-abate sector) enables them to create innovative financial products tailored to transition projects' unique requirements. By directing investment to green initiatives, these institutions can drive the transition to cleaner energy, contributing not only to reducing carbon emissions but also to a more sustainable and resilient energy future. There is  significant  potential  for  enhancing  the  role  of  the  International  Financial  Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) which can act as a conduit for attracting international capital crucial to fill India's climate finance gap. The Report on Transition Finance by the Expert Committee on Climate Finance has submitted their recommendations which can provide a roadmap for IFSCA to develop a climate finance ecosystem and instruments. India also can engage with multilateral development banks and explore the use of new and existing instruments that they have to offer to raise necessary finance which can be ploughed back into financing India's green transition goals.

## Box V.4: Leveraging Market Finance: India's Catalytic Use of Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)

India's economic trajectory towards higher middle-income status is reflected in how the country is evolving in its use of development finance from the World Bank Group.  As a founding member of the World Bank, India became the dominant user of the International Development Association (IDA) - the primary source of concessionary financing from the World Bank.  With increasing income growth, India graduated from the IDA concessionary financing to accessing funding through the World Bank's more commercial IBRD window and,  in  the  process,  becoming  a  contributor  to  IDA.    As  India  begins  to  approach  the borrowing limits for an IBRD country and given the planned investments in human capital, climate transition, and infrastructure, the country now needs to again shift its approach on how to best use multilateral finance. Today India needs to access market finance at scale to fuel its economic growth.  In this context, India is drawing on the Multilateral Investment

Guarantee Agency (MIGA) of the World Bank Group to directly access financial markets on competitive terms by using the multilateral as a mechanism to leverage market finance in addition to drawing on its traditional role as a lender of multilateral finance.

Two MIGA guarantee operations have already been completed this fiscal year.  MIGA provided a credit enhancement guarantee to Japan's MUFG investment bank for their commercial loan of $100 million to the Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL). It will enable DFCCIL to complete the Ludhiana-Khurja and Kanpur-Mughalsarai sections of the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC), and the last mile connectivity between the freight corridor and multimodal logistics terminals. The commercial finance is being executed through GIFT City in Gujarat, where MUFG has opened a centre. In addition, MIGA  provided  credit  enhancement  guarantees  to  Citi,  Standard  Chartered  Bank,  and Credit Agricole for their commercial loans totalingtotaling US$200 million, which was used to partially replace an existing US$500 million IBRD loan to the State Bank of India (SBI). The IBRD loan was provided to SBI in 2016 as part of the Grid Connected Solar Rooftop 22 Program to deliver rooftop solar systems to commercial and industrial customers across India.

Both  operations  reflect  India's  commitment  to  a  green,  economic  growth  strategy.    The freight corridor is a much more efficient mode of transportation relative to road transport and  reduces  millions  of  tons  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (GHG)  each  year.    The  SBI's financing of solar PV program provides clean, renewable energy and reduces greenhouse gas emissions by displacing thermal generation.  For both programs, India used IBRD loans to finance the early phase of infrastructure development - allowing the operations to become commercially bankable - before replacing it with market financing backed by MIGA.  In effect, IBRD investment helped the infrastructure investments cross the green-field risks, making the MIGA-backed market financing competitive with IBRD and, at the same time, allowing IBRD funds to be released for reinvestment in new development projects.   The MIGA guarantee allowed DFCCIL to borrow internationally under commercial terms for the first time, thereby diversifying the SOE's financing options.  For SBI, the guarantees also reduced its cost of borrowing and diversified its sources of funding.  Importantly, in using MIGA, India is following one of the main recommendations of the report written under its G-20 Presidency, calling for the World Bank Group to play a greater role in leveraging market finance for middle-income countries.

5.30. Strategy towards bridging the education-employment gap: Skill development is  at  the  centre  of  changes  happening  in education and labour  markets amid  the  global megatrends, such as automation, action against climate change, the digitalisation of products and services, which are changing the nature of work and skills demands. With one of the youngest populations, a median age of 28, India can harness its demographic dividend by nurturing a workforce that is equipped with employable skills and prepared for the needs of the industry. Elevated levels and superior standards of skills help countries adeptly navigate the challenges and opportunities present in both domestic and international job markets. India has not only

22   MIGA Supports innovative solar rooftop systems in India, Press release by World Bank Group, 2024 (https:// tinyurl.com/3x3yrj42)

recognised the potential of its young workforce but also the issues associated with skilling such a  vast  population. The  National  Policy  on  Skill  Development  &amp;  Entrepreneurship  (NPSDE) focuses  on  bridging  gaps,  improving  industry  engagement,  establishing  a  quality  assurance framework, leveraging technology, and expanding apprenticeship opportunities. Prioritising equity, it targets marginalised groups and emphasises skill development and entrepreneurship for  women.  In  the  entrepreneurial  domain,  the  policy  educates  potential  entrepreneurs, facilitates  mentorship,  fosters  innovation,  enhances  ease  of  doing  business,  and  promotes social entrepreneurship. This, in combination with the National Education Policy (NEP), holds tremendous potential for bridging the education-employment gap in India. However, skills are acquired on the foundations built by the education system, especially at the schools. Therefore, schooling should focus on the basic requirement of foundational literacy and numeracy and the realisation of grade-appropriate learning outcomes. The NEP 2020 and NEP 2023 provides a good framework to realise this objective. It serves as a stimulus for reforming the educational system to increase the employability of the future generation. Implementing the NEP is key to achieving educational outcomes and preparing the youth for participating in the knowledge economy. In addition, new skilling initiatives and revamping the existing skilling initiatives should continue to be of high priority to the Government. The industry itself has much to gain from taking the initiative on this matter with academic institutions rather than leaving it only up to the governments - union and states - to do the heavy lifting. Indeed, it should be the other way around.

5.31. Strategy towards building state capacity and capability: Since 2014, India has made significant strides in delivering crucial infrastructure and implementing direct benefit schemes aimed at enhancing citizens' well-being. The civil service has been at the heart of these transformative efforts. The civil service's ability to design policies and ensure that initiatives reach all citizens has been critical to the success of these programs. However, sustaining and accelerating India's progress in the face of evolving challenges requires the state machinery to reimagine, reinvent, reinvigorate, and re-equip itself. After eighty years of relative stability post-WW II, it appears that convulsive change is in store in global affairs. It is unlikely to leave too many areas untouched - diplomacy, security, and domestic socio-economic development. At senior levels, the country will need the combined wisdom, knowledge and experience of both the generalists and specialists. Civil Service provides the former and the private sector the latter. In recent years, the Government has made a significant beginning in lateral entry into the senior ranks of Central Ministries through a transparent process. This needs to be substantially expanded. It is one way to plug the gap because the need for diverse skills and mindsets will only keep expanding in the coming years. Foundational and mid-career training for civil servants in all specialities has to be re-imagined for the recharging and rebooting of skills,  aptitude  and  attitudes.  Length  of  tenure  too  is  critical  to  grow  into  the  demands  of, and be productive and purposeful, in senior roles. Accountability mechanisms and practices will become necessary, if not already, to ensure policy outcomes at scale and speed. Annual conversations on goals and measurement - at the beginning and the end of the year - at senior levels  will  usher  in  professionalism  and  accountability.  While,  in  theory,  the  desirability  of such a practice is not in doubt, these mechanisms and practices will themselves require many iterations for a better understanding of their feasibility, limitations, and utility to evolve before they are institutionalised more permanently.

## Box V. 5: Mission Karmayogi's holistic approach to building state capacity in India

The First and Second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) reports had identified several  barriers  to  improved  capacity  of  the  civil  service.  These  included  departments implementing policies in silos, 23   poor communication, strict information boundaries, and lack of collaboration which resulted in duplicate efforts and inefficient resource allocation. 24 Undergirding this structure was a personnel management system that hampered the capacity and  motivation  of  civil  servants  to  work  efficiently.  Under-resourced  training  institutes and infrequently updated training programs did not provide officials with the skills and specialisation they needed to grow professionally and meet the changing needs of public administration. 25,26  Performance management systems were not equipped with the proper mechanisms to assess, reward, and improve performance, and to align officials' capacities with the needs of the system. 27  Challenging work environments and lack of mentorship led to reduced motivation to excel at work. 28

Addressing these problems has required looking beyond a single, definitive solution. In their seminal paper on the challenges of policy-making in diverse societies, Rittel and Webber (1973) propose that problems of public policy planning are 'wicked': they are inherently complex, multi-faceted, and resistant to straightforward solutions. 29  hey comprise multiple smaller problems and concern multiple actors, often with competing priorities. There is no clear point at which a problem of this nature can be said to be solved and no ideal solution for it. The government has responded to the wicked challenge of building state capacity by launching Mission Karmayogi, which deconstructs the problem into more tractable subcomponents.  The  program  endeavours  to  enhance  state  capacity  using  the  'WorkforceWork-Workplace' framework to address each level of the civil service as well as the linkages and interactions between them. 30  It provides a multi-pronged solution encompassing:

-  Building  the  capacity  of  the Workforce centred  on  their  roles  and  associated competency requirements at multiple career stages
-  Improving the quality of the Work through role-based human resource management and decision-making
-  Enhancing  the Workplace through  mentorship,  better  managerial  practices,  and improved physical infrastructure

23  First ARC, Report on Machinery of Government of India and its Procedures of Work, 1968, Chapter II, Section 2.2

24    Second ARC, Twelfth Report on Citizen Centric Administration: The Heart of Governance, 2009, Chapter 2, Section 2.6

25   Second  ARC, Twelfth Report on Citizen Centric Administration: The Heart of Governance, 2009, Chapter 2, Section 2.6

26    Second ARC, Tenth Report on Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights, 2008, Chapter 4, Section 4.1

27  ibid., Chapter 5, Section 5.2

28  ibid., Chapter 7, Section 7.4

29   "Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning," Horst W. J. Rittel and Melvin M. Webber, Policy Sciences 4, no. 2 (1973): 155-169.

30   Mission Karmayogi: A Silent Revolution,R.Balasubramaniam Journal of Governance 25 (July 2022), (https:// tinyurl.com/ysevk6ut).

By  connecting  workplace  roles  and  workers'  competencies,  Mission  Karmayogi  builds  a much-needed bridge between capacity building and human resource management systems. Competencies are the attitudes, skills, and knowledge that are essential for a civil servant to  perform  their  role  successfully.  As  officials  evolve  in  their  careers,  the  competencies they are required to possess also evolve. Through Mission Karmayogi, the government is delineating the competency requirements for all civil servants in terms of their roles and duties, as well as the four Gunas or overarching virtues of civil servants as highlighted in the Karmayogi Competency Model. 31  Competencies then become a key tool for enhancing the performance of civil servants. Once competencies have been specified, they can be assessed using several measures, including workplace performance assessments, data from digital MIS systems, and 360-degree feedback mechanisms. This would enable the government to provide calibrated capacity-building support and identify the right person for the right role in government.

Capacity-building programmes, both in terms of  pre-service  training  and  ongoing  professional development, can be designed to build the specific competencies that a civil servant needs to perform their role well. This also creates the space to expand beyond conventional training programs  to  draw  on  a  range  of  approaches  that  are  grounded  in  evidence-based  adult learning principles, such as immersion programs, exposure visits, case studies (through the use of Amrit Gyaan Kosh 32 ), and self-paced and technology-enabled learning. To achieve this at scale, technology-enabled capacity building will allow officials across cadres, states, and  seniority  to  steer  their  professional  development.  The  iGOT  Karmayogi  platform  is rapidly shaping into a central node that enables civil servants to access tailored and needbased capacity-building modules, track their competency requirements and gaps, and share knowledge and learnings across departments.

In  tandem  with  capacity  building,  Mission  Karmayogi  is  also  introducing  a  role-based human  resource  management  system  that  would  allow  the  government  to  match  civil servants with roles based on the competencies they possess and the requirements of the role. Decision-making around postings, transfers, and promotions can then be guided by civil servants' demonstrated competencies and experience. This is a significant shift from the  current  rule-based  approach,  which  will  generate  better  incentives  for  performance among civil servants. Access to the universe of capacity-building resources - and not just what is considered relevant for their level - will enable civil servants to proactively plan their professional journeys within government in a manner that aligns with their areas of interest and expertise.

31    The  Karmayogi  Competency  Model  is  a  public  human  resource  management  framework  developed  by  the Capacity Building Commission of India. The framework is built on four elements: self-awareness of one's own strengths and weaknesses, collaboration and inclusion of diverse voices towards a shared goal, transparency and compliance with the rules and regulation as well as Knowledge of systems and processes, and citizen-centricity and the motivation to transform citizens' lives through one's work.

32   Developed by the Capacity Building Commission of India, Amrit Gyaan Kosh is a dedicated knowledge bank for civil servants which houses teachable case studies, policy simulations, and interactive and immersive learning resources.

Civil servants with enhanced capacities and improved fit for their roles will constitute highperforming and efficient teams. This will be accompanied by investments in building great workplaces for civil servants, characterised by a culture of motivation, shared purpose, and trust,  and  supported  by  stronger  knowledge  management  systems.  Senior  civil  servants will provide mentorship and guidance to early-career civil servants. Some of this is already happening in pockets but these practices will be more widely institutionalised. Upgrades to  physical  infrastructure  will  also  support  civil  servants  to  boost  their  performance, while  technology-enabled  workplaces  will  improve  efficiency  and  collaboration.  Further, technological  infrastructure,  data,  and  workflow  systems  will  strengthen  institutional memory, providing a knowledge base to plan and implement a long-term vision for the social and economic performance of the nation.