# Outlook in the Medium Term

## OUTLOOK IN THE MEDIUM TERM

5.32.  The Indian growth story over the last decade has been one of resilience. The country has weathered the onslaught of multiple global crises because the government dealt with them deftly by forging a recovery strategy that was uniquely designed to address the concerns of citizens while ensuring that the growth momentum continued to be sustained through a wide range of structural reforms. India's strength has always been its institutions, and, many a time, the institutional strength has enabled the country to wade through multiple challenges.

5.33.  The structural reforms undertaken by the Government of India over the course of the last decade have put the economy firmly on a growth path, thanks to which India is soon set to become the third largest economy in the world, following the US and China. In its April 2024 World Economic Outlook, the IMF has raised India's growth forecast for 2024-25 to 6.8 per cent from 6.5 per cent on the back of strong domestic demand and a rising working-age population, making India the fastest-growing G20 economy. It is in line with our expectations for economic growth, as mentioned in Chapter 1. India has graduated from being a low-income country to a low-middle-income country. As it journeys further towards middle and uppermiddle-income status, aspirations of the people keep rising. Satisfaction with past progress fades away from memory quickly, and newer expectations take their place. The measurement of  achievements in the present against rising aspirations leaves society appear restless and discontented. But, this is creative and not destructive. The latent energy of such aspirations needs to be harnessed even as they have to be met. This has to be carried out in a country of  India's  size  and  within  a  democratic  framework.  There  are  no  historical  precedents  and templates to follow for the complexity it entails. What has brought the economy to its present state from where it was three decades ago may not take us to the next destination. Awareness of the unique nature of India's circumstances and its goals is necessary to prepare ourselves to participate in and contribute to its socio-economic progress. Our knowledge and attitudes have to continually evolve to keep up with the requirements that the project, 'Viksit Bharat @2047' entails. Open minds are a good place to start.

5.34.Given the above, the present chapter presents a six-pronged growth strategy premised on the understanding that the structural reforms of the last decade, focused on the supply side of

the economy, have to give way to next-gen reforms that are bottom-up in nature to yield strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth. Primary amongst these strategies is to ensure that capital formation in the private sector grows organically and steadily, delivering endogenous growth in jobs and a fair share of income for workers. Second, financing green transition for India is an area where public-private partnerships will be critical. There need to be innovative financing instruments that can help mobilise private capital towards India's transition efforts. Third, as far as MSMEs are concerned while bridging the credit gap remains a crucial element, the focus also needs to be on deregulation, enhancing physical and digital connectivity, and putting in place an export strategy that enables MSMEs to broaden their market exposure and scale up. Fourth, the potential of agriculture to be an engine of growth, development, and equity has to be exploited through intelligent farmer-friendly policies that are environmentally and climatically sustainable. Fifth, India's education policies and skill policies should adopt a laserlike focus on learning and skilling outcomes and need to be aligned with each other, as well. We can draw lessons from global experiences on how this could be achieved, such as the EU Cohesion Policy 33 . Lastly, enhancing state capacity and capability is critical to ensure that the growth strategy suggested in this chapter achieves fruition. Sustaining and accelerating India's progress in the face of evolving challenges requires dedicated investment in state machinery to reinvent and reinvigorate itself.

5.35.  In Chapter 2 of 'The Indian Economy: A Review', published in January 2024, we wrote that there was considerable scope for the economy to grow at or above 7 per cent on a sustained basis if we could build on the structural reforms undertaken since 2014. The strengthening of the banking system, the creation of an Insolvency and bankruptcy framework, the institution of a nationwide Goods and Services Tax, and the expansion of the country's physical and digital infrastructure are but a few of them. The strategies presented in this Chapter seek to build on these policy initiatives.

5.36.  The new government at the helm of affairs signifies continuity as well as change as India progresses towards the collective goal of ViksitBharat@2047. As envisioned by Prime Minister Modi, ' We need to walk the roadmap of progress, and it won't be solely determined by the government; the nation will shape it. Every citizen will have to give his input and actively participate in it. 'Sabka Prayas', meaning everyone's effort, is a mantra that turns the biggest resolutions into reality. Whether it's the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Digital India campaign, dealing with COVID-19, or the idea of Vocal for Local, we have all witnessed the power of 'Sabka Prayas'. It is through 'Sabka Prayas' that a 'Viksit Bharat' will materialise 34 .'

33   Education,  training  and  lifelong  learning  remain  a  priority  in  the  2021-2027  period  in  EU  cohesion  policy. Overall, EUR 33.6 billion of EU planned allocations have been allocated to measures directly targeting education, training and skills development. The combination and coordination of measures supported by these funds will allow  Member  States  and  regions  to  strengthen  their  efforts  towards  more  inclusive  and  quality  education and training systems in an integrated manner, as well as support reforms in these areas, https://tinyurl.com/ wsuwjsdj)

34 PIB press release of Ministry of Commerce &amp; Industry dated 11th Dec, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/yc2r4ate)