# Setting the Context

## SETTING THE CONTEXT

- 5.1. In 1993, the Indian economy was valued at less than USD300 billion in dollar terms at current prices. Fast forward to 2024, and it is estimated to have reached a staggering USD 3.6 trillion. This represents a remarkable 12-fold increase despite the Indian rupee depreciating by around 3 per cent annually between 1993 and 2024. Moreover, this has been achieved without a  big  rise  in  the  country's  overall  indebtedness,  indicating an efficient utilisation of capital. India's per capita current dollar GDP has increased from 301.5 in 1993 to 2,484.8 in 2023, 1 which indicates a substantial improvement in the standard of living.
- 5.2. India is a historical and long civilisation. It provided answers to many questions that humankind faced and still faces. It is a country with a big land mass and a huge population. It rightly aspires to be reckoned with as a great power in economic and other terms. China, India's neighbour to the Northeast and a nation of comparable size and population and antiquity of civilisation as India, has grown to become a major global economic and political power in less than a generation. India, too, has now set for itself the goal of becoming a developed nation within a generation by 2047, the hundredth year of independence.

1  World Bank, 2023 (https://tinyurl.com/yeksmbde)

- 5.3. Today, the world faces several major fault lines. We have arrived at a multipolar world. It is more difficult than the bipolar world that we were used to for nearly five decades after the War ended. Therefore, mini and significant geopolitical conflicts are likely in the coming decades.
- 5.4. At  a  cultural  level,  the  rise  of  what  is  called  the  'Far  Right'  by  mainstream  media  in advanced nations is, in effect, a clash of priorities between globalist elites and others whose fortunes are bound by and tied to their national geographies. This clash of priorities transcends economics.  It  includes  cultural  and  social  preferences  and  values.  Therefore,  along  with economic stagnation and geopolitical conflicts, societies  in  advanced  nations  are  fracturing from within, too. The literature analysing long political, social, and civilisational cycles has warned us of a fairly to severely turbulent three decades until the middle of the century.
- 5.5. The idea of economic globalisation has run its course. It may not be reversed fully, but it  has peaked. It will continue to face obstacles as economic policies worldwide pivot to the promotion of national champions for reasons too well-known to bear repetition here. Along with the peaking of globalisation, there is also a rethinking of the role of government in national economic  strategy  as  inequality,  poverty,  and  indebtedness  have  become  pressing  issues in  the  aftermath  of  the  Covid  pandemic.  The  clamour  for  easy  answers  to  these  global  and generational challenges has provided an excuse for interventionist policies despite their poor empirical record in achieving prosperous or more equal societies.
- 5.6. Lastly,  there  is  the  crisis  posed  by  climate  change  and  global  warming.  Developed countries are pushing for a reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. With their policies having questionable effectiveness in achieving emission reduction in their own countries, they are ramping up pressure on developing nations. Developing nations are struggling to restore economic growth and reduce poverty and debt in their countries, all of which have been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. They lack both technology and financial resources to undertake the necessary transition to cleaner fuels. Developed nations are generous with pledges and parsimonious in delivering on them. Further, there are huge uncertainties as to the efficacy of drastic measures to combat climate change and their economic impact over the next half to a full decade. Slower growth, stagnation, or outright contraction might trigger social unrest and exodus of people to the West.
- 5.7. This is the global backdrop to India's growth, prosperity, and superpower aspirations for the next quarter century. In contrast, during its rise, China did not face many of these challenges, and even the ones they faced were fairly milder, in comparison. For realising India's aspirations, despite the changed circumstances, a good place to start is to acknowledge and recognise that the terrain has changed to be able to traverse through it and reach the destination.
- 5.8. India has to sustain its economic growth rate over a quarter century and do it sustainably, keeping the environment and climate in mind. Water stress looms large, as does air pollution. Life expectancy, much higher now than in the past, has stagnated in recent years. It has to educate and skill its youth to stay ahead of the curve so that they can work with emerging technologies while overcoming the accumulated education and skill deficits, accentuated by the pandemic, that make it harder to raise productivity even with the current state of technological

progress. It is required to maintain a constant vigil on its borders both in the Northwest and in the Northeast. With the digitalisation of the Indian economy, cybersecurity assumes a much higher degree of importance and urgency. Therefore, providing financial resources for national security is imperative. Fiscal resources have to increase without compromising on economic growth.

- 5.9. The capacity in terms of numbers and the capability of the State in terms of competence, skills,  and  attitude  are  additional  factors  that  would  determine  the  outcomes  of  India's economic and social goals. Economic policies have to be crafted in such a manner that they do not address issues narrowly or incompletely while rendering problems in other areas more intractable. Goals for a higher share of renewable power with its implications for land usage and dependence on inimical powers for resources are one example. The impact of farm sector policies on water security is another example.

5.10.  With the global backdrop described earlier likely to come in the way of India boosting its exports at the same pace and level as East Asian countries and national security considerations likely  to  make  foreign  direct  investment  flows  volatile  year-to-year,  India  has  to  generate domestic resources mostly for its own investment and growth priorities. Geopolitics imposes its ceiling on external deficit and, consequently, external financing.

5.11. Against  this  background,  the  medium-term  growth  outlook  for  the  Indian  economy, which will be detailed in this chapter, is premised on the following key tenets:

-  First, increasing geoeconomic  fragmentation  and  the  consequent  resource nationalism have significant growth-limiting impacts on countries. It has given rise  to  a  trade-off  between  efficiency  and  resilience  that  did  not  exist  a  decade  earlier. Ensuring the security of supply through building buffers and slack has replaced the ability to operate at the frontiers of efficiency. 'Just in case' has replaced 'Just in time'.
-  Second, a global trust deficit is driving countries to pursue policies focused on enabling them to become self-reliant and protect  them  from  external  shocks, especially in sectors of strategic importance. Therefore, the balance between inward-looking policies versus outward-looking policies needs to become more nuanced going forward;
-  Third, the integration of climate change strategies into national development policy and planning is not merely an environmental imperative but more, as it  impacts socio-economic stability, public health, banking, and public finances. Climate change imposes costs and requires policymakers to balance adaptation to climate change and  emission  mitigation.  It  also  necessitates  a  trade-off  between  energy  security  and economic development on the one hand and energy transition on the other.
-  Fourth, for better and worse, technology is emerging as the biggest strategic differentiator determining  the  economic  prosperity of nations. Its productivityenhancing potential is beyond doubt, but the social impact of emerging technologies such as  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  via  labour  market  disruptions  and  labour  displacement  is barely understood. It also has the potential to skew the capital and labour shares of income in favour of the former.

-  Fifth, countries across the board have limited policy space to manoeuvre , given the multiple crises confronting the global economy. Therefore, recognition and acceptance of trade-offs have become more necessary than before for policymakers.
-  Sixth ,  in  the  last  decade  (2014-2024),  the  Government of India has pursued big-ticket reforms focused on restoring the health of the economy, elevating the potential growth by relieving supply-side constraints and strengthening its capabilities, capable of fulfilling the growth aspirations of the people in the present and the Amrit Kaal. The next stage is  to  ensure  that  these  reforms  are  implemented  correctly  and  this  will  require  intense engagement with state governments, the private sector, and civil society. Going forward, the Government's focus must turn to bottom-up reform and the strengthening of the plumbing of governance so that the structural reforms of the last decade yield strong, sustainable, balanced, and inclusive growth.