# India's Medium-term Growth Outlook: With Optimism and Hope

## IndIa's MedIuM-TerM GrowTh ouTlook: wITh opTIMIsM and hope

<!-- image -->

2014-2022 is an important period in the economic history of India. The economy underwent a  gamut  of  wide-ranging  structural  and  governance  reforms  that  strengthened  the economy's fundamentals by enhancing its overall efficiency. With an underlying emphasis on improving the ease of living and doing business, the reforms were based on the broad principles of creating public goods, adopting trust-based governance, co-partnering with the private sector for development, and improving agricultural productivity. Under normal circumstances, reforms of such scale and relevance would have accelerated economic growth. However, largely due to the balance sheet stress caused by the credit boom in the previous years and secondarily due to the one-off global shocks that followed, key macroeconomic variables such as credit growth, capital formation, and hence economic growth were adversely impacted during this period. Further, some reforms deliver results with lagged effects as their diffusion in the economy takes time.

This situation is analogous to the period 1998-2002 when transformative reforms undertaken by the government had lagged growth returns due to temporary shocks in the economy. Once these shocks faded, the structural reforms paid growth dividends from 2003. Similarly, in the present decade, the presence of strong medium-term growth magnets gives us optimism and hope that once these global shocks of the pandemic and the spike in commodity prices in 2022 fade away, the Indian economy is well placed to grow faster in the coming decade. With improved and healthier balance sheets of the banking, non-banking and corporate sectors,  a  fresh  credit  cycle  has  already  begun,  evident  from  the  double-digit  growth  in bank credit over the past months. Additionally, the economy has started benefiting from the efficiency gains resulting from greater formalisation, higher financial inclusion, and economic opportunities created by digital technology-based economic reforms. Thus, India' s growth outlook seems better than in the pre-pandemic years, and the Indian economy is prepared to grow at its potential in the medium term.